Thinking Skills and Creativity 56 (2025) 101727

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Thinking Skills and Creativity
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/tsc

Creative partnerships with generative AI. Possibilities for
education and beyond
Edwin Creely * , Jo Blannin
Monash University, Australia

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Generative AI
Creative production
Posthumanism
Education
Autoethnography
Alterity relations

The impact of generative artificial intelligence (AI) on creative production in industry and education is just beginning to be experienced and understood. This impact is likely to accelerate and
become even more significant as the computational potential of generative AI grows through
training on more diverse and more extensive language models and data sets. Emerging research in
this new field suggests that previous models of understanding the interactions between machine
and human may no longer be sufficient in a world of generative AI. The significant question is
how emerging generative AI technologies will relate to and be a part of human creativity and
creative outputs. In this article, we adopt a posthuman stance and conceive of creative output
involving generative AI and humans in terms of a yet-to-be-fully-realised and emergent relationship that will likely become more integrated and complex. To investigate and experiment
with this relational notion, each of us (as part of an autoethnographic approach) developed a
creative output using ChatGPT: a poem and a multimodal narrative. We then employed the idea
of alterity relations from the American philosopher of technology, Don Ihde, to conceive of the
possibilities and limitations in working relationally and productively with generative AI. As two
academics working in teacher education, we applied our learning from this exploration to possibilities in educational contexts. In this article, we offer several important implications and
provocations for practitioners, researchers, educators and policymakers, not only in terms of
practical concerns but also for rethinking the nature of the creative output.

1. Introduction
Generative AI (such as OpenAI’s ChatGPT), with its capacity to create and produce content autonomously, is likely to have a
significant impact on education and offers both possibilities, limitations, and dangers (W.M. Lim et al., 2023; Luckin et al., 2016). It can
transform the learning process and offer new ways of producing content and interacting with learners. Teachers can work with
generative AI to create curriculum content, generate new ideas, research, build resources and produce lessons that are adaptive to
students’ learning needs. More broadly, creatives in industry have a new facility for creative output, including poetry, artmaking, video
production, journalistic copy and animation, to name but a few possibilities (De Cremer et al., 2023). Professional writers can use
generative AI as a writing and research partner to generate ideas, write sections of text and do menial jobs that potentially free the
writer to be more productive and focused on the quality of the ideas.
However, alongside the potential benefits come the dangers of over-reliance on generative AI across all spheres of human activity
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: edwin.creely@monash.edu (E. Creely).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tsc.2024.101727
Received 2 October 2023; Received in revised form 4 December 2024; Accepted 4 December 2024
Available online 7 December 2024
1871-1871/© 2024 The Author(s).
Published by Elsevier Ltd.
This is an open access article under the CC BY license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

Thinking Skills and Creativity 56 (2025) 101727

E. Creely and J. Blannin

and creative production, including education (Quay-de la Vallee, 2023). This may impact work, employment and the sorts of careers
that are possible in the future. In education, this over-reliance on AI might mean that students are less involved in essential aspects of
human interaction and group work, thus impeding the expected creative and emotional development. Moreover, there is the risk of
perpetuating biases present in training data, which might lead to subtle forms of discrimination, suggesting the need for a critical lens
on the use of AI (Zhou et al., 2024). Finding a balance between using generative AI as a valuable aid and sustaining humanity in
education is essential.
AI has sometimes been deployed as a pattern recognition, prediction, and data analysis tool. With the emergence of generative AI
(GAI), it is being re-conceived in terms of the human-machine dynamics of creativity and creative production. This shift demands a
revaluation of anthropocentrism from a posthuman perspective, suggesting a fundamental rethink of human-machine relations (Banks
& de Graaf, 2020). Rather than viewing GAI and AI-based applications as mere extensions of human capability (as tools), we consider
them active partners capable of generating novel, unexpected outputs that challenge conventional notions of creativity and the sources
of ideas. Of course, this view is contentious, and we fully acknowledge that there are a range of views about the capacity of AI to be
creative in the literature (Ivcevic & Grandinetti, 2024). This potential paradigm shift implies the need for a cross-disciplinary and
cross-sector approach, especially in education. The interlacing of art, science, technology, and philosophy is necessary to understand
and employ generative AI’s full potential.
Our study embodies a collaborative autoethnography by presenting two pieces of personal creative output (a poem and a multimodal story) produced in concert with generative AI. The aim is to highlight the potential relationship between humans and AI while
also adopting a critical perspective and exploring its possibilities and limitations, especially in relation to education.
2. Literature review
Artificial Intelligence (AI) has revolutionised various industries, including the creative sector, by enabling generative AI systems
(GAI) that produce creative outputs (Aydın & Karaarslan, 2023). The relationship between generative AI, creativity, and education has
become a prominent subject of research in recent years (UNESCO, 2019). This literature review aims to provide an overview of
generative AI, creativity, and creative output, with attention to definitions and background.
2.1. Definitions and background
GAI refers to a subset of AI technologies that aim to produce outputs that simulate human creativity. These systems operate on large
datasets, learn patterns, and generate content autonomously. They use machine learning algorithms, such as recurrent neural networks
(RNNs) and transformers, to generate text, images, music, and other forms of creative content. ChatGPT is a popular example of a
generative pre-trained transformer.
Creativity is a multifaceted concept that involves the generation of novel, valuable, and relevant ideas, or artifacts (Runco & Jaeger,
2012), as well as the processes and human contexts from which this output emerges (Creely et al., 2021). In other words, we build
creative capacity with each other in culture, through which culture then evolves (Gabora, 2019). This is reiterated in Glăveanu’s
(2013, 2020) 5A ecological framework which conceptualises actor, action, artifact, audience, and affordances as critical elements
shaping creativity within social, technological, and material contexts.
GAI, as a creative technology, seeks to replicate this human capacity by generating original and innovative content. The algorithms
are trained on vast datasets to learn patterns and create new, imaginative outputs. A significant point is that GAI simulates human
speech patterns from existing linguistic resources but is not human (Baidoo-Anu & Owusu Ansah, 2023). It has no stable worldview,
sense of a self, emotion or belief system. At the same time, with generative AI, this output can be autonomously generated without
direct human intervention, leading to opportunities and challenges in the creative industries, and in education at all levels. Generative
AI has been a paradigm shift in the realm of creativity, challenging traditional notions that creativity is an exclusively human process
and output, and perhaps pointing also to the creativities of non-human species. This technology, through its ability to generate novel
and meaningful content, has blurred the lines between human and machine creativity (Boden, 2019). For instance, AI systems have
been used to create original pieces of art, music, and even literature, demonstrating a capacity for creativity that was once thought to
be uniquely human (McCosker & Wilken, 2020). Generative AI also has the potential to build on human creativity, not replace it, by
providing new tools and methods for creative expression. It can generate a multitude of ideas in a short time, thus aiding in brainstorming and idea generation processes (Elgammalet al., 2017).
2.2. AI in creative industries
The advent of generative AI has already begun to reshape the world, especially in creative industries such as writing, image
generation, animation and special effects (SFX). One significant impact area is the use of AI-generated content in areas traditionally
produced by human creatives, which can disrupt traditional creative production methods. In Hollywood and the entertainment sector,
actors and workers are increasingly concerned about the implications of AI’s wider adoption (Newitz, 2023). AI-powered writing
algorithms can churn out scripts and content rapidly, challenging the traditional roles of human writers and potentially reducing job
opportunities in the creative workforce.
Additionally, AI-driven SFX technology is becoming more sophisticated, allowing for realistic and cost-effective visual effects,
which may alter the dynamics of film production and impact the demand for certain skilled labour (Hermann, 2023). As AI advances,
industry stakeholders must address the concerns of actors and workers while embracing the potential benefits of AI-driven creativity
2

Thinking Skills and Creativity 56 (2025) 101727

E. Creely and J. Blannin

(Liu & Zheng, 2022). Striking a balance between human creativity and AI’s capabilities will be crucial in shaping the future of creative
production in Hollywood and across creative industries.
2.3. AI and education
Integrating AI in education has opened new possibilities for personalised learning, intelligent tutoring systems, assisting teachers’
workloads, creative output, and content generation. AI-driven educational models leverage data analytics to understand students’
learning patterns, adapt content to individual needs, and assess progress effectively (Holmes & Tuomi, 2022). AI-driven applications
based on LLMs, promise personalised learning experiences by generating adaptive content tailored to individual student requirements
(Siemens & Gašević, 2012). These technologies also facilitate interactive simulations that can aid comprehension of complex subjects
like science and mathematics (San Chee & Hooi, 2023). Furthermore, AI-based grading systems streamline assessment processes,
optimising educators’ time and resources (Chhatwal et al., 2023).
However, there are concerns surrounding the reliance on AI-generated educational content. Critics argue that excessive use of AI
may lead to an overly standardised educational experience, potentially stifling creativity, and critical thinking skills (Zaglas, 2019).
Ethical considerations must be carefully addressed, including data privacy and algorithmic bias (Williamson et al., 2020). Moreover,
there is apprehension that an overemphasis on AI could diminish the role of educators, resulting in reduced human interaction within
the learning journey.
2.4. Critical views of AI and generative AI
Generative AI, such as ChatGPT, has the potential to impact education significantly, presenting both opportunities and challenges.
It holds promise in advancing education through personalised learning and innovative content creation to support the work of both
students and teachers. Striking a harmonious balance between AI integration and human guidance is imperative to harness technology’s benefits while upholding the core values of education (Senechal et al., 2023). The question remains how best to utilise, work
or partner with generative AI. Generative AI potentially can foster collaborative creativity by augmenting and extending human capabilities in novel ways, exemplified by co-creation and organic collaborations (Rafner et al., 2023; Vincent et al., 2023). But this
integration will need to respect ethical boundaries while still enhancing creative productivity through human-AI integrations.
Despite its potential benefits, AI, especially generative AI, faces criticism and scrutiny as it comes into creative intersection with all
areas of society. Several critical views have emerged concerning the implications of AI in education and the creative domain Wach
et al. (2023): W.M. Lim et al. (2023). Generative AI’s ability to create convincing fake content, such as deep fake videos and audio,
raises concerns about misinformation and even fraud. Misleading educational content could lead to distorted perceptions of truth and
hamper the pursuit of a factual and testable basis to knowledge (W.M. Lim et al., 2023).
Another potential issue is intellectual theft and appropriation. The proliferation of AI-generated content without proper attribution
may lead to the misrepresentation of creative work. Plagiarism and intellectual property concerns arise as AI-generated outputs blur
the lines between original and derivative work. Within education, this can lead to concerns about the authenticity of creative production as part of fulfilling outcomes. In addition, AI algorithms are often trained on biased or culturally skewed datasets, which can
lead to homogeneity in creative output and cultural biases, and this, in turn can perpetuate stereotypes and limit diversity in
educational content and creative expression (Wach et al., 2023).
In sum, it is becoming clear that generative AI can potentially disrupt and transform creative industries, media production and
education, offering novel opportunities and greater efficiency in output. Critical views emphasise the risks of deep fakes, ‘hallucinations’, misrepresentations, and homogeneity in creative work and educational content (Mai et al., 2023).
3. Conceptual perspective: alterity
This article examines and conceptualises the possibilities for a creative partnership between generative AI and humans and the sort
of hybrid forms that might emerge in this intersection. To understand the nature of this partnership or relationship we needed a
concept that embodies what it means to be in a productive affiliation. The concept we came to is alterity.
The concept of alterity is about appreciating and recognising otherness in terms of the differences between and distinctiveness of
each being, in relational, social, and cultural contexts (Bauman, 1993; Todorov, 1984). This philosophical idea has been explored by
many theorists across a range of disciplines, including ethics and studies in technology (Hazell, 2009). Philosophers such as Martin
Buber (1970), Emmanuel Levinas (1969), and more recently Don Ihde (1990, 1993, 2002) have contributed to an understanding of the
notion of alterity in the context of technology-human relations. Additionally, the emerging importance of posthumanism has brought
attention to the agency of technology and problematised the idea of alterity as being essentially human (Braidotti, 2013; Ferrando,
2019). Most especially, it has shed light on the complexities of human-technology relations and the dynamics of otherness between
human and non-human entities, including animals and the environment.
Emmanuel Levinas developed a fundamental understanding of alterity within relational ethics. For Levinas, alterity is not just
about acknowledging the existence of others but also recognising their independent status apart from reliance on another (1969). In his
ethical, relational philosophy, encountering the other disrupts the desire to control and categorise another being. It thus demands an
ethical response that goes beyond self-interest towards seeking the authentic equality of the other.
Levinas’s idea of ethical alterity prioritises the other, leading to an ethical duty to respond to the vulnerability and suffering of the
other but also be open to what can be learned in mutual and respectful relational encounters that opens the possibility for dialogue.
3

Thinking Skills and Creativity 56 (2025) 101727

E. Creely and J. Blannin

This ethical obligation to the other forms the basis of his philosophy and redefines the relationship between the self and the other in a
way that fosters compassion and empathy. Of course, Levinas’ idea of alterity is altogether anthropocentric: viewing the alterity
relation in purely human terms not involving non-human entities and nature.
Posthumanism, on the other hand, is a conceptual understanding of humans in the world that challenges conventional notions of
human exceptionalism and explores agency and core values in both human and non-human terms, including an emphasis on ecology
and the environment (Barad, 2003, 2007; Braidotti, 2013). It also suggests the idea of alterity as a potential relational space for
creativity that becomes actual when entities enter a relational engagement. Regarding technology, there is an acknowledgement of the
transformative impact of technology on human existence. From a posthumanist perspective, humans may no longer be considered
separate and have full hegemonic control over technology; rather, humans are repositioned in interconnection and relationship with
technology (Ihde, 1990). This paradigm shift brings emphasis to the agency of technology and its active role in shaping human experiences and the world at large.
Moreover, posthumanism interrogates the longstanding boundaries between humans and machines, blurring the lines between
organic, carbon-based creatures and the artificial (Clark, 2003; Pepperell, 2003). This shift in outlook challenges notions of alterity (as
espoused by Levinas and others), built on the imperative of the uniqueness and distinctness of human beings. Technology integration
into human society has arguably altered human perception of self and others, leading to new forms of hybrid identity and
interconnectedness.
This shift in terms of conceiving alterity as encompassing both human and non-human entities is reflected in the writing of Don
Ihde, an American philosopher of technology. He has explored the notion of alterity, specifically within the field of the philosophy of
technology. Ihde asserts that technologies have a form of alterity relations by introducing novel ways of perceiving and experiencing
the world in contrast to humans (Ihde, 1990). According to Ihde, humans encounter a technological other that influences their perceptions, thoughts, and actions when engaging with technologies. Ihde argues that human-technology relations are reciprocal and
dynamic, such that who is in control is in dispute. Technologies enlarge constructions of the human self, altering subjectivities and
affording new vistas for existence and creative action.
Though not currently existing, it is probable that in the future that AI machines will act independently and have authentic existence
apart from humans, displaying Artificial General Intelligence (AGI). Even now, it could be argued that AGI displays some or partial
autonomy in the way it creates and acts through the unknowable ‘black box’ at the centre of current generative AI models (Yampolskiy,
2024). However, this existence may not be anthropomorphised or contain an internalised autonomous self (Gabora & Bach, 2023), and
it is important to consider that AGI may not follow the same path towards self-referential agency as seen in animal species, such as
chimpanzees and corvids (and often demonstrated through the creative use of tools) (Bird & Emery, 2009). This being the case, the
nature of alterity relations may shift to a new sense of otherness that is neither human, nor posthuman. There is perhaps a case to be
made that alterity with AGI may not correlate with humanised or anthropomorphised autonomy but may instead emerge as a new type
of otherness, capable of creativity in its own way.
This form of otherness could embody some aspects of posthumanism while leading to a distinct manifestation of agency that is
different from humans and other animals. As AGI evolves, it might exhibit forms of agency that do not rely on self-referentiality or
creative intelligence in the way that animals do. The future may see the development of a new set of alterity relations, recognising this
emergent, non-human form of agency.
The concept of alterity discussed from the perspectives of Levinas, posthumanism, and Don Ihde’s notion of human-technology
alterity relations suggests the complex and evolving nature of all the relationships that connect to human existence, particularly
the technological in an increasingly digitised world that now includes the strong emergence of AI. Levinas emphasises the ethical
imperative of acknowledging and responding to the differences of the other, while posthumanism challenges human exceptionalism
and explores the transformative agency of technology. Don Ihde’s insights add to this philosophical discourse by recognising that
technology becomes other in an alterity relationship with humans. With the development of AGI, however, Idhe’s conception of alterity may require further expansion for understanding human-technology relations, one that accommodates new kinds of alterity
relations which move beyond current human-centred concepts of control, autonomy, and agency to non-anthropomorphic, nonsentient forms of agency and interaction.
4. Methodology
This study employs a collaborative autoethnographic inquiry approach to explore the intersection of creativity and computergenerated output using GAI (Chang et al., 2016). The research is framed as an exploration of the possibilities and potential applications of creativity through GAI, with a focus on understanding the role of GAI in the creative process. Instead of a specific research
question, our inquiry seeks to engage in a speculative investigation of the emergent space of computer-generated artistic content and
its impact on creativity and education.
4.1. Data generation
This study generates two main types of data: AI-generated content and individually created responses to the AI-generated output.
Firstly, we utilised GAI to produce prompts and creative content. These AI-generated prompts catalysed our creative processes,
enabling us to co-create unique artistic expressions. Secondly, each participant produced individual responses to the AI-generated
content, reflecting on their creative choices, interactions with the AI, and their perceptions of how the AI influenced their creative
outputs. This dual data generation process captures the raw AI-generated material and the human responses and reflections it elicited.
4

Thinking Skills and Creativity 56 (2025) 101727

E. Creely and J. Blannin

4.2. Collaborative autoethnographic inquiry
The collaborative autoethnographic inquiry methodology emphasises individual introspection and collective reflection and dialogue (Chang, 2013). We engaged in creative processes using AI-generated prompts and produced artistic works. Following this
creative phase, we shared our creative outputs and reflections and participated in dialogue. The exchange of creative works and
reflective narratives facilitated an exploration of personal experiences and collaborative insights about working with GAI.
4.3. Thematic analysis
Initially, the creative works and subsequent reflections were independently analysed by each author. Collaborative discussions
were then conducted to refine and validate the identified themes. The thematic analysis focused on exploring the nuanced interplay
between human creativity and AI-generated elements, informed by the notion of alterity and the concept of a creative space where
entities come together to form a new whole (Todorov, 1984; Braidotti, 2013; Whitehead, 1929).
A deductive analysis followed, constructed with a clear framework of analysis centering on key philosophical concepts (below) that
emphasise the dynamic interactions between humans, entities and their environments.
Relation: This theme emerged directly from the application of Ihde’s (2002) exploration of how entities relate within the context of
alterity. As we analysed each other’s reflections, we specifically looked for expressions and instances where the nature of relationships
between humans and AI was discussed.
Hybridity: Braidotti’s (2013) discussions on hybrid identities and forms provided a theoretical backdrop for identifying instances
where merging or evolving identities and new creative forms were intertwined with AI.
Agential Realism: Barad’s (2003) concept of agential realism was employed to identify and categorise data points where agency was
attributed to both humans and AI, and AI became an active participant in the creative process, capable of influencing and altering the
creative outcome.
Shifting Positionalities: Drawing again on Ihde (2002), this theme was shaped by a focus on the positionalities of human and AI
agents. Data highlighting the mutable and dynamic stances the authors took in response to AI interactions were categorised under this
theme, bringing attention to the fluid nature of creative roles and perspectives.
Ethno-onto-epistemological Understandings: This concept arose from a synthesis of the philosophical work of Barad (2003) on the
interconnectedness of being, knowing, and ethical action within the context of interacting with AI.
Each piece of qualitative data was scrutinised utilising these theoretical underpinnings, allowing us to categorise and understand
the complex dynamics at play. This structured, theory-driven approach ensured that our analysis was not only comprehensive but
deeply rooted in philosophical inquiry, leading to a robust understanding of the nuanced interplay between human creativity and AIgenerated elements. We applied the same structured deductive coding system, informed by concepts of alterity, hybridity, and agential
realism, to our AI-assisted creative outputs. However, our analysis in the findings section below, while covering the above categories,
was written in a more integrated and organic fashion.
Through collaborative autoethnographic inquiry, this study aimed to provide insights into the potential creative roles of generative
AI with humans. The methodology of combining AI-generated prompts with individual creative responses and reflections facilitated an
in-depth exploration of the impact of AI on the creative process and created the ground for an emergent discourse on the intersection of
creativity and AI-generated content, providing a speculative, yet insightful, exploration of this evolving landscape.
5. Findings
In this section, we present the findings of our collaborative autoethnographic inquiry. The findings are divided into two sections
built around the two creative works. Each section contains the work itself, a personal reflection by the author and then an analysis of
both by the other author.
5.1. Creative work 1 – a multimodal narrative
Appendix 1 presents the prompt used in ChatGPT to inform this first creative work. The prompt was purposefully short and focused
on using the GAI to develop a useful, relevant character and backstory that would enable the author to construct a narrative text. Also
in Appendix 1, the creative work itself is presented. This piece was created entirely by the human author, drawing on the character
background and narrative details created by the GAI. The creative work became a storyboard that framed the developing narrative. In
addition, images to reflect each stage in the narrative storyboard were generated in a generative AI image creator (https://hotpot.ai/
art-generator). These images provided a way to visualise the story without relying on fine art skills.
5.2. Personal reflection
The genesis of this piece can be traced back to a stimulating dialogue I had with a group of primary school educators. They were
eager to integrate artificial intelligence into their curriculum, not merely as a theoretical concept but as a tangible, relatable entity for
their young students. They believed that with the right guidance, AI could be made more accessible and engaging. The overarching
idea was to generate a fictional character, using AI, that could helm a story designed to demystify this intricate technology for children.
To kick-start the process, I posed a broad, open-ended prompt to the AI software. By keeping the instruction minimalistic, I intended
5

Thinking Skills and Creativity 56 (2025) 101727

E. Creely and J. Blannin

to give the AI an expansive canvas to conjure a character, letting its algorithms roam free without undue constraint. What emerged
from this was genuinely enlightening, prompting me to reassess my initial direction.
While my original inclination had been to root the narrative in a familiar setting - perhaps a modern classroom or a buzzing office
where the presence of AI is already a norm - the character blueprint from the AI swayed my thoughts towards the great outdoors. I
visualised a vibrant tale of exploration, with the protagonist encountering an affable AI-powered robot, paving the way for myriad
adventures. The serendipity of this direction was that it allowed for a richer tapestry of events, interwoven with diverse AI elements
and dynamic interactions, making the story more relatable and captivating.
The AI’s contribution wasn’t limited to just a setting change. It seemed to breathe life into characters that I hadn’t initially conceptualised. For instance, the inclusion of Lily’s parents as scientists rooted in the world of AI research added depth and authenticity to
the narrative. The whimsical addition of a cat, which became the catalyst for Lily’s initial adventure, was another welcome addition by
the AI. These characters, from the AI’s algorithms, not only bolstered the story’s continuity but also provided Lily, the protagonist, with
meaningful connections and a driving force behind her actions.
Reflecting upon the entire process, it became evident that integrating AI into the storytelling process not only enriched the
narrative but also underscored the very premise of the piece: showcasing the potential of AI as a creative partner in education and in
creative industries beyond education.
5.3. Analysis
Two texts have been produced because of a single interaction with generative AI. The first is a multimodal text that reflects the
original prompt, the narrative offerings from AI (visual images and words) and the creative composition and sequencing from the
human. The second is a reflection on the process of working and developing ideas and content in concert with the AI, which reveals the
agency of both the AI and the human in the composition. Therefore, recognition of the distinct otherness of the AI (its alterity) is clear
in both texts, with identifiable original material offered by the AI, including the creation of a story background and character information and developing narrative cohesion. The alterity in this interaction is evident when the AI mimics an interaction with a
human in what appears to be a pseudo ‘other’ person in the creative relationship, suggesting the hybridity of the creative doing (Fabri
et al., 2023).
Both texts provide an intriguing insight into the relationship between a human author and a generative AI partner (Peeters et al.,
2021). The author’s interaction with the AI was not just as a tool (which would position it as merely instrumental, objectifying it) but as
a partner in the creative process and the production of the multimodal story. On one hand, the AI might be viewed as an instrument
because of the definite limitations of what it can do and because it is subject to the parameters set by the human user. On the other
hand, the AI’s contribution of new, unexpected characters and plot trajectories suggests that it became an autonomous contributor,
even with what might be viewed as a simple, rudimentary interaction. There was evident mutability between what the human and the
machine produced. In this context, "mutability" refers to the ability of the roles and contributions of both the human author and the
generative AI to change and evolve during the creative process and produce new hybrid forms. The term highlights the fluidity and
interchangeability between what the human and AI produce. This evokes the question of authorship and thus the ethical ground of this
emergent relationship (Yeo-Teh & Tang, 2023). It is interesting to speculate what might happen if the prompt engineering was taken
further in multiple iterations.
The alternation of functionality between treating the AI as a mere tool and recognising it as a potential co-creator encapsulates the
central tension of this alterity relation: the interplay between what is familiar in human collaborative or distributed creativity and the
estrangement felt in this collaboration with a machine. Moreover, while informed by human prompts, the AI’s output emerges as
something distinct and external to the author’s own cognitive and creative processes—which surprised the human author. The author
recognises this by noting the AI’s output as emanating from what seems like a distinct ‘other’. Such a perception, where the AI becomes
a new type of ‘other’, an agential entity in the creative process, brings attention to human-machine alterity as an emerging posthuman
concern (Hitsuwar et al., 2023). Considering how this relationship might evolve, especially as AI grows in complexity and capability is
intriguing. Will the ’otherness’ diminish, or will it enlarge and deepen?
5.4. Creative work 2 (a set of two poems)
Appendix 2 contains the prompt used in ChatGPT to construct a second creative work. The prompt was highly focused on a theme
for a poem and did not engage with the structural features of the genre. The appendix also contains both the human and the AIgenerated poems. The human poem was created as a direct response to the generative AI poem.
5.5. Personal reflection
I have been writing poetry in one form or another for over 20 years and have a poetry website and five self-published volumes of
poetry. For the most part this has been a solitary expressive and creative act, and it has been me that has generated the output as a
creative agent. In 2023, I presented a paper with colleagues at the SITE Conference in New Orleans, US. As part of that paper, I began
considering the possibilities of using generative AI to create poetry. I wondered what the possibilities are and how might these
prospects shape me as a poet who is also a teacher educator.
This sparked a desire to experiment with generative AI as both poet and academic, towards seeing generative AI as not just as a
random creator of text but as a potential writing companion in a transactional space of creative doing. I thought about my creative
6

Thinking Skills and Creativity 56 (2025) 101727

E. Creely and J. Blannin

output as a poet and how my creativity might be shaped through and with this technology.
So, I used the following prompt with GPT-4: “Construct a poem about human survival in a changing and uncertain world”. This
prompt reflected a theme I had explored with an older adult poetry group that I teach, and I was keen to see what the AI would do with
it. The machine came up with seven four-line stanzas. My initial observations were that the first three stanzas, for the most part, were
quite original and compelling and that there was quite a lot of synergy between what I intended and what the AI produced.
Rather than only using lines from the AI-generated poem in an instrumental way, I decided to respond to the poem in quite a
dialogic way and reflect the existential concerns I have that are also reflected in the poem. It would be true to say that the AI poem
evoked thinking and perspectives that I would not otherwise have had. So, I responded to the AI with my poem “Under the beacon
light” like I was talking back to the AI.
5.6. Analysis
The journey of this solitary poet, who, over two decades, had only his own thoughts as the vehicle for expression, appears to have
undergone a transformative intersection with technology. Human-machine collaboration, especially in poetry writing, has evolved
significantly from the invention of word processing tools to advanced AI-enabled functions like autocomplete. A notable example is
Google’s "Verse by Verse" tool, which generates poetry influenced by styles of famous American poets, building upon an initial line
provided by the user. Drawing from Ihde’s (1990) concept of alterity, this collaboration positions technology as the "Other," an external
entity that co-shapes the poetic output. Such intersections of humans and AI in creative processes challenge the traditional boundaries
of authorship and introduce a new dimension of poetic co-creation (Schober, 2022).
At the outset, the poet’s relationship with his craft has been intimate and singular. However, as technology seeps into this bond, the
poet finds himself navigating a new terrain of relation - that between man and machine. Ihde’s exploration into human-technology
relations offers a prism to view this dynamic. One can argue that technology, specifically generative AI, becomes an extension of
the poet, yet also distinct in its capacity to generate novel output. It appears that AI had status as an independent contributor while, at
times, also standing as a tool that carries out directed tasks.
A palpable shift occurs as the poet interacts with the AI (Ihde’s notion of shifting positions). Initially, the AI is a mere conduit for
expression; yet, as the experiment unfolds, the poet finds himself in a dialogue with the AI, almost on an equal footing. The positions of
creator and tool shift, mere, and diverge in this newfound dynamic.
The text also underscores an unfolding hybridity (Braidotti, 2013) that develops incrementally as the creative work is written. The
poet embarks on a collaboration with an AI, giving rise to a blend of human creativity and algorithmic spontaneity. Braidotti’s (2013)
concept of hybrid roles and ways of thinking becomes ever more salient as the poet returns to the AI output to explore new perspectives
on the chosen topic as the writing process continues. Boundaries between the poet and the tool appear to blur, forging a new hybrid
entity where human expression and machine logic coalesce. This connects to Ihde’s relationality ideas but presents a more dynamic
and fluid intersection where the contributions of human and AI are increasingly commingled in a hybrid state (Braidotti, 2013).
This experiment with generative AI forces one to consider agency within the human and the material (in this case, the AI). Barad’s
(2003) assertion that humans and the ‘other’ (inanimate, material) possess agency finds validation. The AI is not a mere passive tool
but an entity with its kind of ’influence’ and ’power’. The resulting poem is not merely an output of command, but a creation shaped by
human intention and machine interpretation.
With the introduction of AI into the creative process, ethical quandaries about authorship emerge. Levinas’s (1969) exploration of
ethical relationships and responsibilities serves as a foundation for thinking here. Who truly owns the resulting poem? Is it the poet, the
AI, or a shared authorship? The act of ‘talking back’ to the AI with “Under the beacon light” transcends traditional notions of
authorship, suggesting a deepened, ethno-onto-epistemological bond.
6. Discussion
In this section we present a series of reflections, insights, implications and speculations about the possibilities and challenges of
using generative AI creatively and transactionally.
6.1. A fast-moving dynamic space
AI is a fast-moving, dynamic space that has profoundly transformed our world in a remarkably short period. The power of AI lies in
its ability to evolve constantly, harnessing vast amounts of data and sophisticated algorithms to optimise, predict, and automate tasks
that were previously the exclusive domain of humans, including creative expression (O’Dell & Jahankhani, 2021). In our limited
creative engagement with generative AI in our two creative products it was immediately evident that something distinctly novel and
powerful is emerging.
Daily news and social media regularly broadcast about breakthroughs in deep learning, neural networks, and reinforcement
learning, revealing how these technologies are applied to diverse fields ranging from healthcare and finance to entertainment and
transportation. Individuals, just like us, are already creating images, designs, and text through GAI, despite the current lack of clarity
around ownership and ethical use.
The rapid pace of AI advancements challenges both creativity and research to remain adaptable and open to changes in how we
work and what work we do. This dynamic environment fosters a culture of relentless innovation, where today’s ground-breaking
development can be tomorrow’s old news, and creativity is disrupted and challenged in workplaces and in education.
7

Thinking Skills and Creativity 56 (2025) 101727

E. Creely and J. Blannin

However, this dynamism in AI that we experienced in writing a story and a poem also raises important ethical and societal
questions. As AI systems become increasingly capable, concerns about ethical ownership of creations, job displacement, security, and
privacy come to the forefront, especially in creative industries. With creative expression often identified as a uniquely human quality,
and with advances in technology and AI, it is not yet clear how we measure where human creative output ends and AI creativity begins
(Cremer et al., 2023). Indeed, in our creative ‘experiments’ described in this article, it was not always clear what are the creative
boundaries between AI work and human work.
Balancing innovation with responsibility has now become crucial. As humans navigate this exhilarating and perhaps frightening
era, we must approach the AI revolution with enthusiasm for its creative potential and mindfulness of its broader implications.
6.2. Posthuman thinking about generative AI
Posthuman thinking has the potential to reconceptualise the taken-for-granted boundaries between humans, machines, and the
environment, challenging the tendency in the west and north towards anthropocentrism (Hasse, 2019; Henriksen et al., 2022). Within
this understanding, generative AI emerges not just as a useful delineated tool for creative work but as an active and agential partner in
co-constructing content and knowledge and shaping human experiences, which is what we found in our creative inquiry.
As generative AI systems interact with humans in creative and sometimes unexpected ways, as in this study, there may be blurring
of the lines between the creator and who contributed to what was created, prompting questions about agency, authorship, and
creativity (Murray, 2023). Do we control AI, or does it shape our perceptions and outputs in ways we will come to know as the
technology further unfolds? Engaging with generative AI through a posthuman lens invites us to rethink our position in this entangled
creative relationship, recognising that both humans and AI are potentially evolving in this entanglement.
6.3. Moving to relational possibility thinking with generative AI
Within intra-activities, the spaces where all entities actively merge and intertwine, there exists potential for a creative partnership
with AI. Generative AI, while ground-breaking in terms of how humans might relate to machines, presents possibilities and limitations
for creativity. For instance, at the present time generative AI responds more fluidly to a well-crafted prompt than to inserting creative
works as asking for a response where there is a lack of specification. It also perceives the world not through holistic understandings that
characterise humans, but through patterns and interconnections in large language sets, though with increasing sophistication
(Broussard, 2018).
It does not have a stable identity and is not sentient or cognisant of human emotions at the present time. Still, it does have, we
argue, the agency in acting creatively in the world with humans. While it might be argued that machines do not possess emotions and
thus might not be considered as having a ‘self’ and otherness, we argue that such a view is merely anthropocentric, and that having
otherness and agency does not depend on replicating human selfhood or emotional states (Li at al., 2024; Preston, 1991).
At its most basic level, AI simplifies tasks. Beyond simple task execution, we argue that it can adopt a range of roles in transaction
with a human: as a creative partner, coach, or an instrument awaiting adept play. While it offers a guiding framework or structure and
produces competent textual or visual materials, it sometimes lacks depth and granularity, often settling into generic patterns and
repeated types of word usage that might be deemed ‘vanilla’. This was evident in many of the AI generated verses of the poem in this
study. At the same time, our experience is that AI can provoke fresh ideas and insights, suggesting it has status in dialogic spaces,
though to what extent is still a matter for further research. Its semblance of dialogue might merely mirror human interactions, devoid
of genuine equal agency.
Despite the perceived and proven limitations about what AI can do in collaboration with humans, new possibilities might be given
birth. Hybrid collaborations between generative AI and humans might deliver unprecedented creative outputs in what might be
considered postmodern junctures of possibility (Banks & de Graaf, 2020). This fusion harnesses AI’s vast data processing in concert
with human sensibilities, leading potentially to innovative textual, artistic, educational and problem-solving outputs. Together,
human-machine hybridities might redefine boundaries, expanding the horizons of what is creatively possible.
6.4. Critically considering limitations and dangers of generative AI
GAI has ushered in a new era for creative production (Anantrasirichai & Bull, 2022), prompting a re-evaluation of the traditionally
understood dynamics between machines and humans in the realm of creativity. As generative AI’s computational capacities expand, it
becomes increasingly bound to creative processes, from industry applications to academic research and educational possibilities
(Anantrasirichai & Bull, 2022). However, this burgeoning relationship is not without challenges. Integrating AI in creative outputs
presents pressing concerns regarding privacy and intellectual property (Dwivedi et al., 2023). For instance, if, as is the case in this
study, a piece of content is co-created by both humans and AI, who owns the rights to it?
Furthermore, who can claim the right to distribute or repurpose the creation? As governments work towards unravelling the ethical
and legal implications of generative AI, policies must focus more directly on creative output, but the creative process must also be
understood in terms of the how as well as the what. The ethical and legal considerations in national AI policies centre around data,
especially data sharing. They can be seen as overlooking nuances such as ethical algorithm development and comprehensive AI data
management (Saheb & Saheb, 2023).
Problematic ethical biases can be reinforced using GAI through the unsupervised machine learning algorithms and the vast data sets
through which generative AI models are trained. These challenges are ongoing, and answers cannot yet be provided in this emerging
8

Thinking Skills and Creativity 56 (2025) 101727

E. Creely and J. Blannin

and dynamic field. Furthermore, the ethics surrounding the use of generative AI in creative contexts cannot be overlooked. The nature
of creativity, historically considered a deeply human activity, is potentially being transformed, leading to debates about authenticity
and originality in AI-generated works (Gillotte, 2020).
There is also the question of aesthetics. When AI contributes significantly to a creative output, does it diminish the value or
originality of the work? Assigning credit or merit becomes intricate as the lines between human ingenuity and machine generation blur
(Eshraghian, 2020). In our textual creation we both sensed the ambiguities of human with machine. Moreover, introducing AI in
educational and creative settings, as explored by the authors, presents another layer of ethical considerations, including how hybrid
creative work might be assessed. This study has prompted creatives and policymakers to tread carefully to ensure that while learners
benefit from AI’s capabilities, they also understand and critically engage with its limitations and implications.
6.5. Creative production in the wake of generative AI: partners in expression
The advent of generative AI has revolutionised the creative landscape, ushering in an era where technological and human minds
converge in producing art and original textual output, especially in genres such as poetry and story making. The introduction of AI into
artistic expression should make us rethink and re-evaluate our understanding of creativity, agency, and the essence of what it means to
be human in these creative enterprises.
Ihde’s (1990) exploration of human-technology relations becomes paramount as we consider the relationship between the artist
and AI. No longer is creativity a solitary endeavour (if it ever was); it becomes a symbiotic dance between human intention and
machine algorithms. This relationship pushes the boundaries of traditional human-centric creativity, urging us to consider AI beyond
its positionality as tool to a partner in what might be understood as a new form of distributed creativity.
The distinction between the human creator and the AI in these examples is increasingly nebulous, as we found in making our
creative products. Generative AI is not merely an obedient scribe, mindlessly jotting down the artist’s intentions as a digital dictation. It
contributes, influences, and even challenges the creative process. This fluid boundary speaks to the changing dynamics where the roles
of the AI as a servant and master fluctuate.
A profound question arises: Does generative AI have agency? As the output of GAI becomes increasingly sophisticated, it’s evident
that AI isn’t a mere passive entity but an active participant. Sometimes AI can serve as a foundation upon which humans build, while
other times, especially with more complex algorithms, it directs the course of creativity.
The genesis of every AI model lies in human-generated codes, trained on vast content generated by people. However, the future
indicates that AI may develop unique creative footprints independent of its human origin. This transition poses tantalising possibilities
and begs the question, what might AI enable us to conceive that previously remained out of reach?
In addressing the possible downsides of collaborating with AI in creative processes, developing strategies that mitigate risks while
maximising benefits becomes essential. For instance, establishing clear guidelines on intellectual property rights and ethical boundaries can help navigate the complexities of co-creation with AI (Dwivedi et al., 2023). Moreover, transparency in algorithmic processes
and the data used for training AI can alleviate concerns about biases and unintended consequences (Gillotte, 2020). Future research
should also explore mechanisms for ongoing monitoring and evaluation of AI’s impact in creative domains to ensure responsible use
(Saheb & Saheb, 2023).
Considering that AI is a non-human entity, traditional human relational norms do not directly apply to the nature of partnerships
with AI. This necessitates a redefinition of ’partnership’ in this context. AI can be viewed as a dynamic participant in the creative
process: It does not engage with human-like emotions or intentions but influences creative outcomes through its computational capabilities (Eshraghian, 2020). Future discussions might be about clarifying the role of GAI—from a collaborator to an inspirational
companion—highlighting the fluidity and variability of these interactions. This exploration might benefit from interdisciplinary
perspectives, combining insights from technology, ethics, philosophy and the arts to fully understand and articulate the new partnership between humans and artificial intelligence (Anantrasirichai & Bull, 2022).
At its core, the amalgamation of humans and AI in creative domains brings attention to our humanity. As AI mirrors, challenges,
and complements our creative impulses, we get a deeper insight into our desires, fears, hopes, and limitations. It pushes us to explore
realms of thought and expression we might have shied away from or never even considered. GAI could be seen to thus magnify the
human experience, causing us to question and redefine the parameters of art, and most importantly, discover novel facets of our own
humanity. Far from diminishing the value of human creativity, GAI might serve as a catalyst, propelling us into a future where art,
aided by technology, reaches unprecedented heights.
6.6. Educational implications
Our exploration of human-AI creative partnerships has significant implications for education. The findings suggest that generative
AI can serve as more than just a static tool, potentially becoming a collaborative partner in creative learning experiences across all
sectors of education (Baidoo-Anu & Owusu Ansah, 2023; Fabri et al., 2023). This shift challenges traditional pedagogical approaches
that position the teacher at the centre and raises important questions about how AI might be integrated in a balanced way into
educational settings.

9

Thinking Skills and Creativity 56 (2025) 101727

E. Creely and J. Blannin

The research suggests that AI in a range of educational settings can enhance creative output by offering novel perspectives and ideas
and enhancing the efficiency of productive processes (Holmes et al., 2023; Rafner et al., 2023), as evidenced in both the story and
poetry examples. However, educators must carefully balance AI assistance with maintaining authentic human creativity, learning and
output that would be assessed. This requires developing new frameworks for assessment that acknowledge hybrid human-AI creations
while ensuring students develop essential creative and critical thinking skills afforded by AI.
The study also highlights the need for educators to understand AI’s limitations, biases and ethical considerations, including issues
of authorship and intellectual property (Murray, 2023). Professional learning might focus on helping teachers understand how to
effectively partner with AI while fostering students’ ability to critically engage with AI-generated content and maintain their creative
agency. Thus, the integration of generative AI into education offers transformative opportunities but necessitates careful pedagogical
adaptation.
7. Conclusion
This collaborative autoethnography explored the intersections of generative artificial intelligence (GAI) and creative endeavours,
with a particular focus on understanding the dynamics of collaboration between humans and machines. Our approach combined
theoretical analysis and practical experimentation to unravel the complexities of authorship, ownership, and the transformative potential of AI in democratising creative pursuits. This has implications, especially in educational settings.
One of the most profound realisations was the inherently relational nature of creating artistic work with AI. This relationship is
neither static nor predefined; it is constantly in flux and characterised by ever-shifting power dynamics. Our findings shed light on the
significant promise of AI in fostering engagement in artistic domains, as well as in education.
However, this research was not without its limitations. Several questions were posed, and while our study laid some groundwork, it
did not answer all of them definitively. Our interpretations and insights are largely grounded in our personal experiences with GAI.
While these observations were useful, we make no claim that they encapsulate the full range of interactions others might have with
similar AI tools. Despite these constraints, this study introduces provocative concepts that can serve as a launchpad for future research
endeavours.
While the lens for this article might be narrow, the ideas proposed are expansive and beckon other scholars to investigate more
deeply with larger data sets.
A further limitation, and possible future research focus, was our inability to prompt the AI to reflect on its creative process and the
human-authored outputs, due to the technological constraints at the time. Future research could explore this aspect, leveraging advances in AI to deepen our understanding of AI as a collaborative partner in creativity and AIs ability to rationalise and position itself in
the creative process.
Finally, our methodological approach is not without its challenges. Autoethnography, while valuable for exploring the emergent
field of AI and generative creativity, has inherent limitations. Its personal nature can introduce biases as researchers interpret their
own experiences and creative outputs (Ellis, 2003) and these biases may affect the plausibility of findings. However, autoethnography
remains a powerful method for this domain, providing rich, contextual insights crucial for understanding the complex, and novel,
dynamics of AI-driven creativity (Chang, 2013).
Looking ahead, the evolution of AI is poised to be both disciplinary and sector specific. We anticipate the rise of GAI applications
tailored for industries and contexts where interactions and relational opportunities are designed based on discrete needs, especially
including those in education. AI’s exact role and influence within these sectors remain a topic of speculation, signalling an emergent
phenomenon that remains in its nascent stages. As we stand on the cusp of this new era, researchers and practitioners alike must engage
critically with these evolving dynamics, shaping a future in which AI augments human creativity in nuanced and ethically sound ways.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Edwin Creely: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, Resources, Project administration,
Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Jo Blannin: Writing – review & editing, Writing –
original draft, Visualization, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization.
Appendix 1
Initial prompt given to ChatGPT and subsequent output (annotated screenshots):

10

Thinking Skills and Creativity 56 (2025) 101727

E. Creely and J. Blannin

Final human-created creative output

11

Thinking Skills and Creativity 56 (2025) 101727

E. Creely and J. Blannin

Appendix 2 (annotated screenshots)

12

Thinking Skills and Creativity 56 (2025) 101727

E. Creely and J. Blannin

Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
References
Anantrasirichai, N., & Bull, D. (2022). Artificial intelligence in the creative industries: A review. Artificial Intelligence Review, 1–68. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462021-10039-7
Aydın, Ö., & Karaarslan, E. (2023). Is ChatGPT leading generative AI?. What is beyond expectations? Academic Platform Journal of Engineering and Smart Systems, 11
(3). https://doi.org/10.21541/apjess.1293702

13

Thinking Skills and Creativity 56 (2025) 101727

E. Creely and J. Blannin

Banks, J., & de Graaf, M. M. A. (2020). Toward an agent-agnostic transmission model: Synthesizing anthropocentric and technocentric paradigms in communication.
Human-Machine Communication, 1, 19–36. https://doi.org/10.30658/hmc.1.2
Baidoo-Anu, D., & Owusu Ansah, L. (2023). Education in the era of generative artificial intelligence (AI): Understanding the potential benefits of ChatGPT in
promoting teaching and learning. Journal of AI, 7(1). https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4337484
Barad, K. (2007). In Meeting the universe halfway: Quantum physics and the entanglement of matter and meaning. Duke University Press.
Barad, K. (2003). Posthumanist performativity: Toward an understanding of how matter comes to matter. Journal of Women in Culture and Society, 28(3), 801–831.
https://doi.org/10.1086/345321
Bauman, Z. (1993). Postmodern ethics. Blackwell.
Bird, C. D., & Emery, N. J. (2009). Insightful problem solving and creative tool modification by captive nontool-using rooks. PNAS Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America, 106(25), 10370–10375. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0901008106
Braidotti, R. (2013). The posthuman. Polity.
Boden, M. A. (2019). AI and Creativity. In Springer Handbook of Model-Based Science, 759–778.
Broussard, M. (2018). Artificial unintelligence: How computers misunderstand the world. MIT Press.
Buber, M. (1970). I and thou. Charles Scribner’s Sons (W. Kaufmann, Trans.)(Original work published in 1923).
Chang, H., Ngunjiri, F., & Hernandez, K.-A. C. (2016). Collaborative autoethnography, 8.
Chang, H. (2013). Individual and collaborative autoethnography as method. handbook of autoethnography (pp. 107–122). Left Coast Press.
Chhatwal, M., Garg, V., & Rajput, N. (2023). Role of AI in the education sector. Lloyd Business Review, 1–7. https://doi.org/10.56595/lbr.v2i1.11
Clark, A. (2003). Natural-born cyborgs: Minds, technologies, and the future of human intelligence. Oxford University Press. https://doi.org/10.2307/3654679
Creely, E, Henriksen, D., & Henderson, M. (2021). Three modes of creativity. Journal of Creative Behavior, 55(2), 306–318. https://doi.org/10.1002/jocb.452
Cremer, D. D., Bianzino, N. M., & Falk, B. (2023, April 13). How generative AI could disrupt creative work. Harvard Business Review. https://hbr.org/2023/04/howgenerative-ai-could-disrupt-creative-work.
Dwivedi, Y. K., Kshetri, N., Hughes, L., Slade, E. L., Jeyaraj, A., Kar, A. K., Baabdullah, A. M., Koohang, A., Raghavan, V., & Ahuja, M. (2023). So what if ChatGPT
wrote it?” Multidisciplinary perspectives on opportunities, challenges and implications of generative conversational AI for research, practice and policy.
International Journal of Information Management, 71, Article 102642. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2023.102642
Ellis, C. (2003). The ethnographic I: A methodological novel about autoethnography. Rowman & Littlefield.
Elgammal, A., Liu, B., Elhoseiny, M., & Mazzone, M. (2017). CAN: Creative adversarial networks, generating “Art” by learning about styles and deviating from style
norms. In 8th International Conference on Computational Creativity. Cornell University. https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.07068v1.
Eshraghian, J. K. (2020). Human ownership of artificial creativity. Nature Machine Intelligence, 2(3). https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-020-0161-x. Article 3.
Fabri, L., Häckel, B., Oberländer, A. M., Rieg, M., & Stohr, A. (2023). Disentangling human-AI hybrids. Business & information systems engineering. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s12599-023-00810-1
Ferrando, F. (2019). Philosophical posthumanism. Bloomsbury Academic.
Gabora, L. (2019). Creativity: Linchpin in the quest for a viable theory of cultural evolution. Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences, 27, 77–83. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cobeha.2018.09.013
Gabora, L., & Bach, J. (2023). A path to generative artificial selves. In Progress in Artificial Intelligence: 22nd EPIA Conference on Artificial Intelligence, EPIA 2023 (pp.
15–29). Faial Island, Azores: Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-49011-8_2. September 5–8, 2023Proceedings, Part II.
Gillotte, J. (June 2020). Copyright Infringement in AI-Generated Artworks. UC Davis Law Review, 53(5). https://ssrn.com/abstract=3657423.
Glăveanu, V. P. (2013). Rewriting the language of creativity: The five A’s framework. Review of General Psychology, 17(1), 69–81. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0029528
Glăveanu, V. P. (2020). A sociocultural theory of creativity: Bridging the social, the material, and the psychological. Review of General Psychology, 24(4), 335–354.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1089268020961763
Hasse, C. (2019). Posthuman learning: AI from novice to expert? AI & Society, 34, 355–364. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00146-018-0854-4
Hazell, C. (2009). Alterity: The experience of the other. AuthorHouse.
Henriksen, D., Creely, E., & Mehta, R. (2022). Rethinking the politics of creativity: Posthumanism, indigeneity, and creativity beyond the western anthropocene.
Qualitative Inquiry, 28(5), 465–475. https://doi.org/10.1177/10778004211065813
Hermann, I. (2023). Artificial intelligence in fiction: Between narratives and metaphors. AI & Society, 38(1), 319–329. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00146-021-01299-6
Hitsuwari, J., Ueda, Y., Yun, W., & Nomura, M. (2023). Does human–AI collaboration lead to more creative art? Aesthetic evaluation of human-made and AIgenerated haiku poetry. Computers in Human Behavior, 139, Article 107502. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2022.107502
Holmes, W., Bialik, M., & Fadel, C. (2023). Artificial intelligence in education. Globethics Publications.
Holmes, W., & Tuomi, I. (2022). State of the art and practice in AI in education. European Journal of Education, 57(4), 542–570. https://doi.org/10.1111/ejed.12533
Ihde, D. (1990). Technology and the lifeworld: From garden to earth. Indiana University Press.
Ihde, D. (1993). Postphenomenology: Essays in the postmodern context. Northwestern University Press.
Ihde, D. (2002). Bodies in technology. University of Minnesota Press.
Ivcevic, Z., & Grandinetti, M. (2024). Artificial intelligence as a tool for creativity. Journal of Creativity, 34(2), Article 100079. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
yjoc.2024.100079
Levinas, E. (1969). Totality and infinity: An essay on exteriority (A. lingis, trans.). Duquesne University Press (Original work published in 1961).
Li, C., Wang, J., Zhang, Y., Zhu, K., Wang, X., Hou, W., Lian, J., Luo, F., Yang, Q., & Xie, X. (2024). The good, the bad, and why: Unveiling emotions in generative AI.
In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) 2024. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2312.11111
Lim, W. M., Gunasekara, A., Pallant, J. L., Pallant, J. I., & Pechenkina, E. (2023a). Generative AI and the future of education: Ragnarök or reformation? A paradoxical
perspective from management educators. The International Journal of Management Education, 21(2). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijme.2023.100790100790
Liu, Z., & Zheng, Y. (2022). AI ethics and governance: Black mirror and order. Springer.
Lim, W. M., Gunasekara, A., Pallant, J. L., Pallant, J. I., & Pechenkina, E. (2023b). Generative AI and the future of education: Ragnarök or reformation? A paradoxical
perspective from management educators. The International Journal of Management Education, 21(2), Article 100790. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijme.2023.100790
Luckin, R., Holmes, W., Griffiths, M., & Forcier, L. B. (2016). Intelligence unleashed: An argument for ai in education. UCL Institute of Education Press.
Mai, K. T., Bray, S., Davies, T., & Griffin, L. D. (2023). Warning: Humans cannot reliably detect speech deepfakes. Plos One, 18(8), Article e0285333.
McCosker, A., & Wilken, R. (2020). Automated media: An institutional theory perspective on algorithmic media production and consumption. Routledge.
Murray, M. D. (July 5, 2023). Tools no not create: Human authorship in the use of generative artificial intelligence. Case Western Reserve Journal of Law. https://doi.
org/10.2139/ssrn.4501543. https://ssrn.com/abstract=4501543. or.
Newitz, A. (2023). On strike against AI. New Scientist, 259(3450), 22. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0262-4079(23)01465-3
O’Dell, L. M., Jahankhani, H., & Jahankhani, H. (2021). 1—The evolution of AI and the human-machine interface as a manager in Industry 4.0L. M. O’Dell, G. Bowen,
D. Hagan, & A. Jamal (Eds.), 1—The evolution of AI and the human-machine interface as a manager in Industry 4.0. Strategy, Leadership, and AI in the Cyber
Ecosystem, 3–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-821442-8.00015-X
Pepperell, R. (2003). The posthuman condition. Consciousness Beyond the brain.
Peeters, M., van Diggelen, J., van den Bosch, K., Bronkhorst, A., Neerincx, M., Schraagen, J., & Raaijmakers, S. (2021). Hybrid collective intelligence in a human–AI
society. AI & Society, 36, 217–238. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00146-020-01005-y
Preston, B. (1991). AI, anthropocentrism, and the evolution of ‘intelligence. Minds and Machines, 1, 259–277. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00351181
Vallee, H, Quay-de la (2023, March 15). Generative AI systems in education – Uses and misuses. Centre for democracy & technology. https://cdt.org/insights/
generative-ai-systems-in-education-uses-and-misuses/.
Rafner, J., Beaty, R. E., Kaufman, J. C., Lubart, T., & Sherson, J. (2023). Creativity in the age of generative AI. Nature Human Behaviour, 7(12), 1836–1838. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41562-023-01751-1
Runco, M. A., & Jaeger, G. J. (2012). The standard definition of creativity. Creativity Research Journal, 24(1), 92–96. https://doi.org/10.1080/10400419.2012.650092

14

Thinking Skills and Creativity 56 (2025) 101727

E. Creely and J. Blannin

Saheb, T., & Saheb, T. (2023). Topical review of artificial intelligence national policies: A mixed method analysis. Technology in Society, 74, Article 102316. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.techsoc.2023.102316
San Chee, Y., & Hooi, C. M. (2023). C-VISions: Socialized learning through collaborative, virtual, interactive simulations. Computer support for collaborative learning
(pp. 687–696). https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/document?repid=rep1&type=pdf&doi=1ed2a455520809d321acfaf21637f8fcb3e6db26.
Schober, R. (2022). Passing the turing test? AI generated poetry and posthuman creativity. In H Nagl-Docekal, & W. Zacharasiewicz (Eds.), Artificial intelligence and
human enhancement: Affirmative and critical approaches in the humanities (pp. 151–166). De Gruyter. https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110770216-009.
Senechal, J., Ekholm, E., Aljudaibi, S., Strawderman, M., & Parthemos, C. (2023). Balancing the benefits and risks of large language ai models in K12 public schools.
Metropolitan Educational Research Consortium.
Siemens, G., & Gašević, D. (2012). Guest Editorial—Learning and Knowledge Analytics. Educational Technology & Society, 15(3), 1–2. https://www.jstor.org/stable/
10.2307/41503403.
Todorov, T. (1984). The conquest of America. The question of the other (R. Howard, Trans.).
UNESCO. (2019). Beijing consensus on artificial intelligence and education. https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000368303.
... Vincent, F., Lubart, T., Bartolotta, S., Gironnay, V., Botella, M., Bourgeois-Bougrine, S., & Gaggioli, A. (2023). Artificial intelligence & creativity: A manifesto for
collaboration The Journal of Creative Behavior, 57(4), 472–484. https://doi.org/10.1002/jocb.597
Wach, K., Duong, C. D., Ejdys, J., Kazlauskaitė, R., Korzynski, P., Mazurek, G., Paliszkiewicz, J., & Ziemba, E. (2023). The dark side of generative artificial intelligence:
A critical analysis of controversies and risks of ChatGPT. Entrepreneurial Business and Economics Review, 11(2), 7–24. https://doi.org/10.15678/
EBER.2023.110201
Whitehead, A. N. (1929). Process and reality. Macmillan.
Williamson, B., Bayne, S., & Suellen, S. (2020). The datafication of teaching in Higher Education: Critical issues and perspectives. Teaching in Higher Education, 25(4).
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/13562517.2020.1748811.
Yampolskiy, R. V. (2024). AI: Unexplainable, unpredictable, uncontrollable. CRC Press.
Yeo-Teh, N. S. L., & Tang, B. L. (2023). Letter to editor: NLP systems such as ChatGPT cannot be listed as an author because these cannot fulfill widely adopted
authorship criteria. Accountability in Research. https://doi.org/10.1080/08989621.2023.2177160
Zaglas, W. (2019). Uni experts consider whether robots can really take over in the classroom. Campus Review. https://www.campusreview.com.au/2019/09/uniexperts-consider-whether-robots-can-really-take-over-in-the-classroom/.
Zhou, M., Abhishek, V., Derdenger, T., Kim, J., & Srinivasan, K. (2024). Bias in generative AI. arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2403.02726

15

