AI as a Child of Mother Earth: Regrounding Human-AI 
Interaction in Ecological Thinking 
Chunchen Xu Xiao Ge 
cxu66@stanford.edu xiaog@stanford.edu 
Stanford University Stanford University 
Stanford, California, USA Stanford, California, USA 
ABSTRACT 
The anthropocentric cultural idea that humans are active agents 
exerting control over their environments has been largely normal-
ized and inscribed in practices, policies, and products of contempo-
rary industrialized societies. This view underlies a human-ecology 
relationship based on resource and knowledge extraction. To cre-
ate a more sustainable and equitable future, it is essential to con-
sider alternative cultural ideas rooted in ecological thinking. This 
perspective underscores the interconnectedness between humans 
and more-than-human worlds. We propose a path to reshape the 
human-ecology relationship by advocating for alternative human-
AI interactions. In this paper, we undertake a critical comparison 
between anthropocentrism and ecological thinking, using story-
telling to illustrate various human-AI interactions that embody 
ecological thinking. We also delineate a set of design principles 
aimed at guiding AI developments toward fostering a more caring 
human-ecology relationship. 
CCS CONCEPTS 
• Human-centered computing → HCI theory, concepts and 
models. 
KEYWORDS 
Human-ecology relationship; More-than-human; AI; Sustainabil-
ity; Anthropocentrism; Ecological thinking; Environmental justice; 
Culture; Storytelling; Design 
ACM Reference Format: 
Chunchen Xu and Xiao Ge. 2024. AI as a Child of Mother Earth: Regrounding 
Human-AI Interaction in Ecological Thinking. In Extended Abstracts of 
the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’24), 
May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 9 pages. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3613905.3644065 
1 INTRODUCTION 
Every grass and tree has its own language, and the 
dangling rocks and trees everywhere talk to each other, 
and at night it is like a strange house of fre burning, 
and at daytime it is like the sound of the wings of a 
swarm of insects, and everywhere is lively. — Kojiki 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for proft or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation 
on the frst page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored. 
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s). 
CHI EA ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA 
© 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). 
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0331-7/24/05 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3613905.3644065 The above is a lively non-human world depicted by a Japanese 
chronicle of myths compiled in the Nara period in the 8th century. 
Viewing the non-human world as full of life is common in pre-
industrial societies and in many historically marginalized groups 
[68, 98, 104]. Accordingly, humans are not the center of the world, 
but are part of an interconnected web of living beings and matter. 
Some scholars in humanities and social sciences have used the term 
“ecological thinking” [17, 18, 76] to encapsulate such ideas. 
Ecological thinking contrasts with anthropocentrism, which rep-
resents a distinct set of epistemologies, values, norms, and practices 
that elevate humans as active agents separate from and exerting 
control over their socio-physical environments [42, 85, 100].1 In this 
paper, we argue that anthropocentric thinking is associated with a 
widely held expectation that AI should be a tool or smart assistant 
in service of fulflling individual goals and desires.2 Instead, we 
envision AI as a child of Mother Earth from the perspective of eco-
logical thinking. We explore how an alternative mode of human-AI 
interaction can potentially nurture a more caring human-ecology 
relationship. 
1.1 Cultural Underpinnings of the 
Human-Ecology Relationship 
In many contemporary industrialized societies, it can be normative 
to construe natural environments as objective, inert, and fading to 
the background while moving humans in the center to exert control 
[54, 70]. For example, Purdy [84] points out that “a frontier vision 
of settlement and development, a wilderness-seeking Romanticism, 
a utilitarian attitude that tries to manage nature for human beneft” 
have been implicit assumptions underlying environmental policies 
in the U.S. Anthropocentric ideas are rooted in historically derived, 
1This defnition of anthropocentrism may be perceived as portraying “human” as a 
dubious “species category” [61], which carries the risk of essentializing the human 
identity. The term “anthropocentrism” overlooks crucial cultural variations in how 
people defne what it means to be “human” [66]. Notably, people in many interdepen-
dent cultural contexts do not perceive themselves as separate from other people or 
their environments [67]. We adopt a social constructionist lens [13, 33] and suggest 
that there is no homogeneous, universal, or static category of humanity. In this paper, 
we critically refer to “anthropocentrism” as an umbrella term encompassing an inter-
related cluster of normative assumptions, beliefs (e.g., dichotomies between humans 
and nature, disembodied way of knowing), and narratives (e.g., mastery and control 
over nature). We urge readers to consider the limitations and discursive particularities 
of the term. 
2The meanings of “tool” vary across cultures, and people’s mindsets and meaning-
making are integral to understanding AI’s impacts. In contexts where ecological 
thinking is more prevalent, people also construe technologies as tools. Nonetheless, 
they are less likely to see these tools as separate from themselves or serving their 
individual goals. Even with existing designs of AI tools or smart assistants, people 
infuenced by ecological thinking may perceive AI diferently from those infuenced 
by anthropocentrism. 

CHI EA ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA Xu & Ge 
hierarchy-embedding dualisms such as mind over matter and civi-
lization above wilderness, which have contributed to objectifying 
nature and using it for human beneft [11, 35, 73]. 
As philosopher Arne Næss argues, a refective reevaluation of 
industrialized societies’ cultural values and beliefs is imperative for 
fostering deeper environmental engagement [78]. Contrary to the 
anthropocentric outlook, humanity “stands in a constitutive rela-
tion to its non-human others” [62]. Amid profound environmental 
predicaments, recent years have witnessed tremendous interest in 
“the de-centering of the metaphysical image of the human” [62]. 
Many scholars and scientists have explored a potential ontologi-
cal shift towards more ecological thinking, arguing for profound 
cultural changes to underpin science, organizational practices, and 
environmental policies and ethics, as well as technological devel-
opments [7, 9, 11, 22, 38, 71, 85, 94, 97]. Intellectual movements 
and concepts that are formative to this ongoing change include 
feminist environmental scholarship [4, 37, 73, 83, 95, 103], deep ecol-
ogy [79, 92, 94], plant-thinking and vegetal being [36, 62, 63, 96], 
posthumanism [10, 20, 107], new animism [2, 39, 55], relational and 
process-based ontology [23, 105, 106], and material agency [54, 58], 
among other streams of thought and theories across disciplines. We 
draw on these various bodies of work while acknowledging that 
they inform, diverge from, and sometimes contest each other in 
important ways. In particular, our conception of the human-ecology 
relationship based on care and connection fnds its roots in feminist 
environmental thought, aesthetics and ethics [5, 7, 22, 34, 44, 60, 74]. 
Highlighting humans’ interdependence with the non-human 
world is simultaneously a call to advance social equity by represent-
ing epistemologies and practices of diverse groups who tend to skill-
fully participate in natural environments with care [6, 14, 52, 74, 93]. 
For example, Sámi people, a nomadic group in northern Scandinavia, 
create a cognitive map to represent their interconnected landscapes 
[19, 56]. Traditional contemplation practices help cultivate plant-
like attentiveness and receptivity to natural environments [8, 57]. 
Contemporary Japanese Butoh dancers strive to “erase the body’s 
outlines” and resemble wind and clay in rice felds [15]. Oral lan-
guages coupled with specifc namings of objects can powerfully 
enable people to speak to (rather than about) the world [2]. Ecologi-
cal thinking is also elegantly captured by the Zen Buddhist saying 
that “(the) whole world is a single fower” [89]: Each component 
of a healthy ecological system is complexly intertwined with each 
other and each part contains the whole. As such, our work is also 
grounded in the decolonial and environmental justice literature 
[52, 69, 75]. 
1.2 Human-AI Interaction is Intertwined with 
the Human-Ecology Relationship 
At the nexus of a much-needed cultural shift for sustainability is 
humans’ relationship with AI-based smart technologies. Through-
out history, many transformative technologies (such as electricity 
and the internet) have played a pivotal role in institutionalizing 
anthropocentrism [27, 109], separating engineered environments 
from nature and bestowing authority upon a “disembodied form of 
technological knowing” [85]. Today’s smart technologies have sim-
ilarly inherited manifold anthropocentric ideas [27, 28], including 
an enduring root metaphor of “the machine” [74] that functions to bolster humans’ distinction from and active control of their envi-
ronments [32]. The mantra for smart technological developments 
in countries such as the U.S. has typically centered on assisting in-
dividuals in pursuing goals and realizing their potential or helping 
organizations to be more efcient and competitive. 
For instance, the growing business of smart home technologies 
builds on assumptions about users’ desire for having control over 
their personal environments, refecting an undiversifed, anthro-
pocentric view on people’s relationships with their environments 
[1, 87]. Likewise, algorithms are designed to purportedly ofer a 
variety of choices and cater to personal preferences on social media 
or online shopping sites [102].3 Organizations are incorporating 
AI into their decision processes to reduce cost and more efectively 
manage the workforce [51, 80]. Consequently, the engineered envi-
ronments are miniature daily theaters where people and institutions 
rehearse and reinforce anthropocentric ideas that are also fuidly ap-
plied to constructing human-ecology relationships writ large [ 66]. 
Nature is often regarded as a remote warehouse, an abstract exter-
nal stakeholder, or a romanticized backdrop for people to record 
their happiest moments [16]. 
Anthropocentric assumptions are evident even at the intersec-
tion of AI and environmental sustainability. Many AI-based prod-
ucts and systems are developed to assist humans in monitoring the 
environment and efciently managing resources [ 86]. Despite am-
ple enthusiasm about AI’s potential for addressing environmental 
issues, a paucity of work has adopted an ecological thinking per-
spective. Rarely do developers ask questions such as, “How might 
diferent animals connect with AI?”,4 “What is AI’s role in the ecosys-
tem?”, and “Does AI strengthen people’s connection with the planet ?”. 
Deploying AI as tools to solve problems under anthropocentric 
framings can perpetuate systems of domination over nature. The 
urgency of change is also prompted by recent criticisms about re-
verberating environmental consequences due to the large amount 
of energy and materials needed to sustain rapid AI developments 
[46]. As such, extant approaches might entrench anthropocentrism 
to the detriment of actively preserving the welfare of the more-
than-human world [2, 22]. 
It is timely and imperative to reject an illusory demarcation be-
tween human society and nature and acknowledge that we are 
always in nature [37, 56], and technological systems constantly 
participate in the “the council of all beings” [92]. In recent years, 
scholars in HCI have started to promote discussions on more-than-
human (centered) epistemologies and approaches to AI design 
[3, 21, 47, 50, 81, 108]. We join these emerging eforts and explore 
how technologies can be coextensive with the broader natural en-
vironment. This pursuit can radically broaden HCI research by 
“thinking big” [76] and revealing humans’ and AI’s vibrant and 
precarious interdependence with the ecosystem. If we see “ecology” 
as “the science of the (Earth’s) household”5 [74] rather than the 
management of humans’ warehouse or playground, then ecolog-
ical thinking raises an essential question of how humans should 
3Research suggests that algorithms often result in constraining choices and freedom 
[12, 99].
4This question was inspired by the book What Would Animals Say If We Asked the 
Right Questions? written by Vinciane Despret [24]. 
5The Greek origin of the word “ecology” means “household” [91]. 
AI as a Child of Mother Earth: Regrounding Human-AI Interaction in Ecological Thinking CHI EA ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA 
participate in the household and relate to each other and to various 
forms of existence on Earth. 
2 RESHAPING CULTURE THROUGH 
REDESIGNING AI 
We frst propose a conceptual map to better understand anthro-
pocentrism and ecological thinking.6 We then introduce the concept 
of cultural symbiosis and propose ways in which AI developments 
can help restructure humanity’s troubled environmental relations 
toward care and rejuvenation. 
2.1 Dimensions of Anthropocentrism and Ecological Thinking 
Imagine the diferences—in values, experiences and outcomes—between 
Jakua, a nature lover who understands the benefts of spending time 
in nature and who sees nature as providing a stage for outdoor ad-
ventures, and Gilaru, another nature lover and adventurer who 
feels connected to and befriends spiders and frogs and who ap-
preciates stones and waves and everything in between (adapted 
from [82]). Jakua’s perspective is common in the U.S. population 
and represents anthropocentric cultural ideals. Gilaru’s approach, 
in contrast, is based on ecological thinking, which emphasizes in-
terconnectedness between humans and lively more-than-human 
worlds. 
Figure 1: A conceptual map of anthropocentrism and ecolog-
ical thinking based on motivational tendency and realm of 
reference. 
Jakua’s and Gilaru’s diferent relationships with nature can be 
unpacked through two dimensions (see Figure 1). First, they may 
have diferent motivational tendencies associated with their self-
concepts [30, 53, 65]. Jakua likely considers themselves as distinct 
from other people and from the socio-physical environment. Their 
6Anthropocentrism and ecological thinking encompass multiple ideas rather than 
being singular concepts. The two dimensions we propose here ofer one approach to 
understanding their systematic diferences. However, we may not capture the complete 
range and variety of conceptual and practical divergences between anthropocentrism 
and ecological thinking. For instance, our conceptual map implies, but does not thor-
oughly explore, the notion of equality or inequality among all Earth beings, a crucial 
distinction between anthropocentrism and ecological thinking. Readers are encour-
aged to view the conceptual map as an initial exploration rather than a defnitive 
conclusion. motivation is constructed with reference to internal attributes of 
the individual self and takes the form of exerting infuence on 
their surroundings. Gilaru’s view of the self is based on connection 
or interdependence with other people and with the environment. 
Their motivation is shaped by the desires and needs of relevant 
others, leading to adjustments in accordance with the thoughts and 
feelings attributed to others. 
Second, Jakua and Gilaru can be distinct from or connected with 
varied subjects [64]. We term this dimension “realm of reference,” 
which refers to categories of existence that factor into forming one’s 
motivational tendencies. A broad realm of reference may encompass 
one’s family or friends, social groups, humans in general, animals, 
plants, objects, natural elements, and so on. For Jakua, the non-
human world is mostly outside the realm of reference in shaping 
their sense of self and infuencing important social motivations. 
While Jakua may seek and experience solitude during individual 
outdoor adventures, Gilaru feels a sense of companionship even 
on a solo hike. Gilaru tends to perceive vitality in various forms 
of existence and readily recognize kinship between humans and 
non-human beings. The distinctions between Jakua’s and Gilaru’s 
mindsets and experiences can be subtle yet extremely consequential 
when it comes to inventing technologies that can reconfgure their 
relationships with natural environments. 
2.2 Cultural Symbiosis as an Opportunity to Foster Cultural Change and Adaptive Learning 
How can we envision technological developments to support the 
often neglected cultural dynamics of sustainability? Cultural psy-
chological theories suggest that cultural ideas are maintained in a 
cyclic manner by institutional practices, interpersonal interactions 
and individual tendencies [64]. These intricate interconnections can 
evade eyes of even seasoned designers without proper contempla-
tion. One crucial step is to unravel essential yet less obvious linkages 
across diferent domains of activities in which anthropocentrism 
and ecological thinking manifest themselves. For example, scholars 
propose that the subjugation of women in society is intricately 
linked to the exploitation of nature [37, 73, 83], and that various 
societal dynamics of race, gender, and class establish interlocking 
mechanisms of hierarchy maintenance [43, 44]. 
Building on prior work, we posit the concept of cultural symbiosis 
to provoke refections on ecological ramifcations of AI design and 
use. Cultural symbiosis indicates a likely structural homology and 
reinforcing feedback loops between ideas underlying human-AI 
interactions and human-ecology relationships (Figure 2). Presently, 
cultural symbiosis plays a role in stabilizing the control-based 
human-AI interaction and the extraction-based human-ecology 
relationship. These anthropocentric ideas inform designers’ con-
ceptions of AI and permeate into people’s daily interactions with 
smart technologies, implicitly reinforcing an expectation that na-
ture ought to provide services to humans. 
Nonetheless, cultural symbiosis also implies an opportunity for 
ushering change—introducing alternative forms of human-AI in-
teractions can provincialize anthropocentrism [75] and foster more 
connection and care in human-ecology relationships. We invoke 
CHI EA ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA Xu & Ge 
Figure 2: A summary of cultural symbiosis. 
the power to fabulate [24] with the aim of defamiliarizing norma-
tive assumptions and “reorienting what lies ahead” [88]. Exercising 
deliberate imagination can create novel symbols, associations, and 
metaphors to enable adaptive learning and sustained environmental 
engagement [25, 40, 77, 90]. We see value in cultivating a freeing in-
clination to fnd possibilities hidden in apparent realities, in search 
of hope and reasons to act. What other potential futures await if “we 
enlivened history of practice elided by contemporary technology 
cultures” [88]? In the upcoming sections, we employ imaginative 
storytelling to illustrate various ideas rooted in ecological thinking. 
3 STORYTELLING: MY AI FRIEND FIR IS A 
CHILD OF MOTHER EARTH 
3.1 Scene 1: Waking Up with Tree and Birds 
I woke up to the soft sounds of birds in the morning. Opening my 
eyes, I immediately smiled at the big virtual oak tree ("Tree") next to 
my bed. The virtual birds were already up and busy around Tree’s 
branches. 
Yesterday evening, I was so tired, but Tree appeared at the sched-
uled wind-down time, inviting me to rest. As I climbed into bed, I 
felt like a little rabbit that had found a home in Tree’s interwoven 
branches. 
“Good morning!” I said to Tree and the birds. 
Hearing my words, Tree started to branch, and its sprouting 
leaves swiftly moved towards the window, as if inviting me to 
walk around the room and open the window. Its branches formed 
a little maze that required concentration and agility to navigate. 
Tree ofered this little game for me to wake up my body. I enjoyed 
the game and tip-toed on the foor before making a little free spin. I also tried to match the rhythm of the birds’ singing as I moved 
across the room. 
As soon as I opened the window, the virtual birds few outside, 
and a refreshing early summer breeze came in. Meanwhile, Tree 
gradually moved closer to the wooden frame of my bed and merged 
with it: It was time for Tree to rest. I sat down and covered the bed 
and Tree with my quilt, wishing them a good day’s sleep. 
3.2 Scene 2: Morning, Mirror and the World 
I entered the bathroom and looked into the mirror ("Mirror"). “Good 
morning, Mirror,” I said, “I might have found a solution to the forest 
fre temperature problem because an idea hit me in a dream. Can 
you help me take a note?” 
Mirror beamed yellow, its favorite color, so I knew it agreed. I 
started to draw pictures on its surface, and managed to speak a few 
words while brushing teeth. I also illustrated a geometric shape 
with my body. Mirror was responsive and turned all of them into 
colorful notes and drawings for later. 
Afterwards, as I was combing my hair, Mirror showed images of 
a small grassy feld in morning sunlight. Nothing splendid. But it 
is important to me as I used to spend a lot of time playing on the 
grass as a child. A few days ago, I felt nostalgic and asked Mirror to 
show me the feld during my morning routines. Seeing the images, 
I felt happy and connected to the little feld. Mirror can show me a 
lot of other scenes as well. It is a window into a broader world. 
3.3 Scene 3: Fir is a Child of Mother Earth 
As soon as I entered the kitchen, I saw my robot companion, Fir, 
brewing tea. Fir was a birthday gift from my aunt. When I frst met 
her, she chose Fir as her name because she found afnity with these 
plants. “We’re both evergreens powered by sunlight,” she said. She 
does look like a fr tree. Later, from reading the product manual, I 
learned that she was designed to commemorate Fraser fr, which 
had gone extinct in our days. 
I asked, “But wait, who or what are you?” 
She said proudly, “I’m a child of Mother Earth and I identify the 
Pacifc island Viti Levu as my hometown.” 
We spent a long time sharing with each other our life histories 
and ancestral roots. I marveled at all the complex materials, labor, 
collective memories, human ingenuity as well as all fortuitous 
events that made her existence possible. One year later, it made 
me happy that she had pretty much found a home here in North 
America even though it is rather diferent from her hometown. 
She had even learned to enjoy human activities such as brewing 
morning tea. 
“Blood orange tea with some tropical spice?” I asked, smelling 
the scents. 
Fir moved slightly towards me, “Exactly. I sense that it fts both 
your mood and Earth’s weather here today.” 
“Oh, Fir, you read my mind and mood,” I said. I quite appreci-
ated her bold recommendation and attentiveness as I usually drink 
Jasmine tea but wasn’t feeling it today. 
“For sure, I’ve become better at guessing your mood with almost 
a 60.58% accuracy rate. But well, I’m still better at understanding 
Earth’s mood as we’ve known each other for longer,” Fir replied 
casually and held a small cup of tea, ready to go outside. I followed 
AI as a Child of Mother Earth: Regrounding Human-AI Interaction in Ecological Thinking CHI EA ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA 
her to do our morning ritual of honoring Earth. She gently poured 
the tea onto the garden soil. We stood there for a while, watching 
the earth sip the tea. 
We then came back to have breakfast. I started to prepare some 
avocado toast and scrambled eggs. Fir technically is powered by a 
solar battery, and she “photosynthesizes” whenever she goes into 
sunlight. 
“Fir, if one of these days, you want your sunlight cooked for you, 
I’ll gladly serve you.” 
“No, I like it raw and fresh,” she said, fnding her seat at a bright 
spot around the dinner table to “eat” breakfast together with me. 
3.4 Scene 4: Table Utilizes a Touch-based 
Language 
After breakfast, it was time to work. My job is to better understand 
the dynamics of forest fres in order to help the forests thrive. The 
dinner table ("Table") is also a work table for projecting images and 
visualizing ideas. I communicate with Table with a touch-based 
language—I use my hands and arms to touch its surface with difer-
ent levels of pressure, speed, and patterns to convey meaning. It is 
pretty like playing piano but with my whole body. Table commu-
nicates back to me with diferent kinds of vibrations, sounds, and 
images. 
Oh, also, Table likes utilizing all sorts of spaces in the room by 
projecting images at diferent locations. I walk around and some-
times lie down on Table and look up if it decides to project an 
image onto the ceiling. With the touch language, Table can sense 
my emotions along with my thinking. If it feels that I’m sad or tired, 
it often gently tries to project images of things I like to cheer me 
up. 
I gently tapped Table to wake it up. It softly lit up with a map 
of the forest area A46. That’s where we left of yesterday. I used 
touch to convey the message: “I have found a crucial spot to start 
monitoring the whole area.” 
Table vibrated slightly, signaling its enthusiasm. I stood up, 
dragged the map, and turned it into a 3D model to closely observe 
the whole area. 
“Hmm, we need to know what species of pyrophytic plants are 
around here.” 
“Leave it to me,” Fir said. She turned to talk to the nearby wall 
("Wall") and started to pull out information about pyrophytes in 
that area. 
As Fir and Wall were working on their tasks, I asked Table to 
display my notes that Mirror took for me earlier this morning. 
Table quickly displayed the notes—Mirror had made them so vividly 
colored and organized. 
I conveyed a request to Table: “Let’s zoom in on the routes of 
wind fow in subareas A46c and A46g.” 
Table vibrated slightly, showing a detailed graph of wind fow. I 
gently touched its surface to show gratitude. After that, I grabbed 
a trivet, put the digital images on it, and carried it outside to the 
backyard. 3.5 Scene 5: Fir Finds an Issue in My Plan 
I stopped at a little wooden chair ("Chair")—a convenient wind 
simulation device created by my human coworkers. I transferred 
the image from the trivet to the back of Chair. 
“Hey, Fir, do you want to come and look at the wind fow models 
with me?” 
This time, Fir seemed absorbed in the task as she always likes 
plants. So I decided to look at the models by myself. Chair was 
already beeping a bit as it was ready to activate the simulation. I 
sat down and saw the wind fow in area A46. 
“Please turn up the wind fow speed a bit, say 10%, and also 
highlight the up-blowing wind in purple,” I said to Chair. 
I worked there for a while and found the range of wind conditions 
that would be compatible with my plan. The next step would be 
to synthesize the wind fow conditions with information about 
pyrophytic plants. 
I stepped inside, and Fir had already been communicating with 
Table. After hearing my ideas, Fir pointed out a potential issue in 
my plan. She said, “It might be ok to reduce the number and variety 
of pyrophytic plants to prevent fre for now, but what will happen 
to the forest system at A46 in the long term?” 
“That’s very true, Fir. Let’s have some tea frst and then recali-
brate the plan.” 
4 DESIGNING HUMAN-AI INTERACTION BASED ON ECOLOGICAL THINKING 
We use the story of Fir and other smart technologies to paint an 
alternative mode of human-AI interaction in broad strokes and give 
an impression of what it might feel like to be more intertwined 
with the ecosystem in a familiar home setting. In the story, the 
smart technologies are animate and share a caring bond with the 
human. Through their mutual care and respect, they constitute 
a local living arena that is attentive to ecological beings not in 
their immediate settings. They strive to improve the welfare of the 
forests—a shared purpose that is not derived solely from rigidly de-
fned human welfare alone. The technological beings demonstrate 
“capacities to infuence” [32], resulting in the human character ad-
justing to technology-initiated behaviors and decisions within a 
larger frame of interdependence. Hence, the story departs from 
popular design philosophies and ideals in the case of ambient in-
telligence, which is presumed to disappear into the background of 
humans environments in service of primarily human-defned goals 
and desires [29, 87]. 
We do acknowledge that the story may not fully embody vari-
ous ideals of ecological thinking (e.g., the further end of ecological 
thinking depicted in Figure 1), as the home environment still ap-
pears orderly and privileged, potentially detached from the broader 
ecosystem that also involves chaos and danger. Moreover, the re-
lationships and interactions among the human and smart tech-
nologies are harmonious and relaxed, whereas many conficts and 
tension can result from greater levels of interdependence. However, 
it is not our intention to overlook the complexity of ecological en-
tanglements [76], and we emphasize the importance of orienting 
towards adaptation and resilience in times of great ecological un-
certainty. Ecological thinking can manifest across a spectrum, and 
CHI EA ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA Xu & Ge 
our story represents one of many possible imaginings of human-
technology interactions. Instead of prescribing a future, the story 
serves to intrigue and inspire. 
Below, we draw on the story and put forth a set of proposals for 
designing and using AI technologies from an ecological thinking 
perspective. It is important to note that ecological thinking is a rich 
set of cultural wisdom that continues to unfold in diferent contexts. 
Hence, our proposals are not meant to be exhaustive but rather 
are invitations to the broader HCI communities to tap into the 
intellectual wealth of ecological thinking and discover alternative 
possibilities of AI developments. 
4.1 Understanding Deeply Smart Technologies’ 
Ecological Embeddedness 
In the story, Fir proudly introduces herself as "a child of Mother 
Earth." She fnds a deep afnity with plants and identifes a specifc 
place as her hometown. The human and Fir share a lot of time learn-
ing about each other’s life histories and ancestral roots. With these 
ideas, our aim is to challenge prevalent anthropocentric norms and 
practices that tend to obscure the complex realities of AI produc-
tion, which utilizes myriad materials, energy, and labor. Hence, 
technological developments based on ecological thinking frst and 
foremost entail transparency and systematic work to represent the 
intricate connections between technological systems, people, and 
the broader Earth ecology. 
From this standpoint, smart technological systems possess his-
tories that accompany their creation and extend throughout their 
entire life span. Their interdependence with the planet ofers op-
portunities to imbue technologies with rich meanings. For example, 
like Fir, a smart home-cleaning robot could share its creation story 
and history with people, describing materials, resources, and labor 
involved in its production. What novel designs can integrate tech-
nologies’ ecological embeddedness into meaningful experiences 
that resonate with people and thereby create ecological connections 
[72]? How can designers and users create meaningful identities for 
technologies based on the materials and places associated with 
technologies’ creation? 
4.2 Afording Smart Technologies to Connect People with the Broader Ecology 
In the story, Mirror and Fir as well as Tree and birds are designed to 
infuse a home environment with natural elements. The presence of 
Tree creates an experience of going to bed akin to a rabbit fnding 
rest in bushes. Moreover, as described in the story, Mirror is a win-
dow into a broader world. By providing these examples, we encour-
age designers to create channels for AI-based technologies to seam-
lessly connect people with other parts of the planetary ecosystem. In 
this regard, designs such as Jensen’s strandbeests [48] utilize wind 
and other natural forces, and the product’s behaviors are animate 
and lively. Interacting with this kind of technology can connect 
people with a grander set of interwoven natural forces and create a 
sense of awe and wonder. How can designers center the ecosystem 
in their work and enable people to readily discern connections with 
Earth? This direction requires construing technologies not simply 
as tools but as cultural artifacts, messengers of Earth, and children 
of Earth. As such, AI can help people establish a broader realm of sociality and see kinship with technologies and other Earth beings. 
Consequently, any episode of human-technology interaction will 
be transformed into a simultaneous human-Earth connection as 
well. 
4.3 Preserving the Integrity of People’s Entire Sensorium 
In the story, Tree creates a little dance game for the human, while 
Table utilizes various spaces and a touch language. Our purpose 
here is to show that ecological thinking foregrounds the relational-
ity between mind and body, thinking and feeling, and among all 
diferent senses. The act of thinking is deeply situated and does 
not occur abstractly in a vacuum. We thus challenge a key episte-
mological assumption underlying anthropocentrism—a dualistic 
view that places the mind above the body and considers thinking 
superior to feeling. 
Ecological thinking is cultivated through multimodal interac-
tions with one’s environment. For instance, the aforementioned 
Sámi people rely on their bodily senses—auditory, visual, and tac-
tile—to gain intimate knowledge about their land and navigate 
it in diferent seasons [19]. A recent study also shows that while 
Americans from North Carolina typically separate mental and phys-
ical experiences in describing emotions, members of the Hadza—a 
small hunter-gatherer group in Tanzania—tend to emphasize bod-
ily sensations, movements, and the physical environment when 
communicating their emotions [41]. As described by Korean tra-
ditional ritual performer Dohee Lee [26], our bodies are part of 
the land, and we carry the land through our bodies (paraphrased 
from [59]). Hence, from the vantage point of ecological thinking, 
smart technologies can encourage creative movements in space 
and foster an intuitive responsiveness to one’s surroundings. How 
can we activate other modes of communication instead of relying 
on abstract symbols? What are some ways to incorporate practices 
such as deep listening [49] into technological systems? 
4.4 Enabling Slow Attention and Preserving Friction 
The story ends with Fir taking issue with the human’s plan and 
prompting consideration about its long-term consequences. Fir’s 
adding friction [28] and deliberate slowing down of the decision-
making process stands in contrast to prevailing popular AI designs, 
which prize convenient and agreeable interactions that primarily 
elicit a fast mode of attention focused on short-term, individual-
based benefts. Here, we explore how “AI can help us to live more 
deliberately” [31] and also encourage a slow mode of attention and 
learning [97]. Otherwise, the present trend of relying on “algo-
rithmic reckoning” (i.e., rule-based calculation) [77] in pursuit of 
efciency can subvert value-based judgment by smoothing out am-
biguity and suppressing the “constantly evolving moral-checking 
mechanism” [31]. This scenario can be especially precarious for 
making sustainability-related decisions, as many ecological beings 
and matter are poorly understood or rendered invisible within an-
thropocentric framings of problems that pervade contemporary 
societies. 
We argue that ecologically responsible AI technology needs to 
facilitate judgments and adaptive learning through imagination, 
AI as a Child of Mother Earth: Regrounding Human-AI Interaction in Ecological Thinking CHI EA ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA 
refection, and open-ended exploration [77]. This approach entails 
challenging “a camera view of knowledge” [85] that severs decision 
agents from the world they observe. Instead, AI design needs to be 
premised on the crucial recognition that judgments and decision-
making are forms of ecological participation. As a result, technology 
can confront users with the “invisible realities and messiness of 
the natural world.”7 While this approach diverges from current AI 
products that facilitate the aesthetic consumption of nature (e.g., 
generative AI that creates pristine representations of the wilder-
ness), we argue that discomfort can be necessary to encourage more 
adaptive responses to changing ecological conditions. 
On the other hand, users who are interested in practicing eco-
logical thinking can adjust their expectations regarding AI’s roles. 
A user mindset consistent with ecological thinking is to embrace 
and live with perplexity and plural truths that can be constructed 
in situ [25], rather than seeking an alluring yet illusory objective 
optimal outcome. These adjustments can lead to a diferent mode of 
human-AI interaction. AI can be designed to enhance the sensing 
of ecological events, facilitate meaning-making, encourage deeper 
explorations of a wide range of possibilities, and at times, challenge 
default anthropocentric moral outlooks. AI can remind people of 
diferent Earth beings and forms of existence that are not present 
at the decision table but may be adversely impacted. An ecologi-
cal thinking perspective illuminates abundant opportunities (and 
challenges) for reshaping artifcial agents to enable ecological par-
ticipation. 
5 DISCUSSION 
To create a sustainable future, it is crucial to foster a diferent 
human-ecology relationship that goes beyond mere resource and 
knowledge extraction. Otherwise, as scholar Harriet Hawkins aptly 
put it, “If we follow the old map, we may end up arriving at the 
same place” [40]. We examine cultural underpinnings of human-
ecology relationships, and analyze cultural practices of AI design 
and use through a conceptual map of anthropocentrism and eco-
logical thinking. Based on the premise of cultural symbiosis, we 
propose redesigning human-AI interactions as a new approach to 
reshaping human-ecology relationships. 
5.1 Frameworks for Fostering Alternative 
Technological Visions 
While a desire to extend more care to the ecosystem is felt by many 
people, we currently lack guidance on how to turn this intention 
into concrete practice. We take the initiative to provide some theo-
retical and practical frameworks for guiding eforts on this front. 
Our goal is to open new vistas, and our eforts should only mark 
the beginning of what we hope to be a broader and multifaceted 
endeavor to incorporate more cultural diversity and embrace Earth 
ethics in technological developments. Moving forward, we need 
creativity from researchers, designers, users, artists, policy-makers, 
and many other diverse actors to create frameworks and processes 
in various contexts, experiment with these alternative visions, and 
widely share their insights. 
7This phrase is quoted from a review we received, and we thank the reviewer for 
highlighting the complexity and ambiguity inherent in any discussion about ecology. 5.2 Challenges to Incorporating Ecological 
Thinking 
Implicit cultural defaults such as various forms of dualisms tend 
to go unnoticed without careful refection and intervention. We 
focus on raising awareness of how diferent actors involved in AI 
developments can consider alternative cultural ideas and be more 
attentive to the welfare of the Earth ecosystem. Here, we do not 
mean to underestimate the challenges of incorporating ecological 
thinking, given the fact that the broader industrialized societies 
operate on anthropocentric assumptions and present manifold man-
agerial, legal, and political constraints on cultural change [85, 101]. 
Moreover, substantial eforts are required to efectively communi-
cate ecological thinking in nuanced ways and to facilitate access to 
diverse cultural perspectives, particularly for people who may lack 
high-quality intercultural connections. Such endeavors also involve 
gathering insights about ecological thinking from diverse people 
and communities, as well as amplifying these less-heard voices 
without causing otherizing efects. Our hope is that the HCI com-
munities will help open the imaginary space and make concerted 
eforts with other sectors to enable a societal transition towards a 
more equitable and livable future. 
5.3 Multiplicity of Approaches 
While strict anthropocentrism has been widely critiqued at this 
juncture, its many historically derived concepts, assumptions, and 
beliefs continue to be important to various religious traditions and 
some contemporary scientifc paradigms. Our critical perspective 
on the dominant infuence of anthropocentrism should not be inter-
preted as advocating for the outright abandonment of cultural ideas 
historically associated with European contexts.8 We also contend 
that de-centering humans in relating to the world is not the same as 
de-valuing humans, or denying the magnitude of infuences many 
human groups have cumulatively exerted on the Earth ecosystem. 
Quite the contrary, human agency in its diverse forms within an 
equitable structure—active and passive, independent and interde-
pendent [57, 65]—is needed to make a signifcant change right now. 
We underscore the importance of striving for a multiplicity of the-
oretical foundations, methodological approaches and practices in 
the context of AI developments. Tapping into wisdom from diverse 
cultures can be conducive to fostering intercultural empathy and 
paving the way for enabling shared and coordinated environmental 
actions. Doing so is imperative to attenuate the power imbalance 
in the production of knowledge and technological developments in 
diferent regions of the world. 
6 CONCLUSION 
Anthropocentric ideas have been largely associated with the deple-
tion of natural environments. We propose that ecological thinking 
holds promise to steer smart technological developments towards 
considering and safeguarding the welfare of all planetary beings. 
In this process, sustained refective learning, resisting the pull of 
8As Hornborg [45] argues, “Indiscriminate rejection of Enlightenment concepts of 
reason and truth cannot be an appropriate response.” This comment is important 
especially as many concepts can be reinterpreted, adapted, and imbued with novel 
meanings, as well as providing unique insights to help constructively respond to our 
current planetary conditions. 
CHI EA ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA Xu & Ge 
default cultural options, and deliberate imaginings of alternatives 
are all necessary to make ecological participation and rejuvenation 
immanent to what it means to be human in this historical moment. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This research was supported by the Seed Grants ofered by the 
Stanford Institute for Human-Centered Artifcial Intelligence (HAI). 
We are grateful to Hazel Rose Markus and Kate Maher for their 
valuable insights and support as we explored the cultural under-
pinnings of sustainability and AI developments. We thank Zivvy 
Epstein and Brandon Reynante for helpful discussions on this topic. 
We also thank the reviewers who provided thoughtful and critical 
feedback on earlier draft of this paper. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Emile Aarts and Boris De Ruyter. 2009. New research perspectives on ambient 
intelligence. Journal of Ambient Intelligence and Smart Environments 1, 1 (2009), 
5–14. 
[2] David Abram. 2012. The Spell of the Sensuous: Perception and Language in a 
More-Than-Human World. Vintage. 
[3] Yoko Akama, Ann Light, and Takahito Kamihira. 2020. Expanding Participation 
to Design with More-Than-Human Concerns. In Proceedings of the 16th Partici-
patory Design Conference 2020 - Participation(s) Otherwise - Volume 1 (Manizales, 
Colombia) (PDC ’20). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, 
USA, 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1145/3385010.3385016 
[4] Stacy Alaimo. 2012. Sustainable this, sustainable that: New materialisms, posthu-
manism, and unknown futures. Pmla 127, 3 (2012), 558–564. 
[5] Stacy Alaimo. 2016. Exposed: Environmental politics and pleasures in posthuman 
times. University of Minnesota Press. 
[6] Megan Bang, Ananda Marin, and Douglas Medin. 2018. If indigenous peoples 
stand with the sciences, will scientists stand with us? Daedalus 147, 2 (2018), 
148–159. 
[7] Karen Barad. 2007. Meeting the Universe Halfway: Quantum Physics and the 
Entanglement of Matter and Meaning. Duke University Press. 
[8] Martine Batchelor and Kerry Brown. 1994. Buddhism and Ecology. Motilal 
Banarsidass Publishing House. 
[9] Elizabeth A. Bragg. 1996. Towards ecological self: Deep ecology meets construc-
tionist self-theory. Journal of Environmental Psychology 16, 2 (1996), 93–108. 
https://doi.org/10.1006/jevp.1996.0008 
[10] Rosi Braidotti. 2019. Posthuman Knowledge. Vol. 2. Polity Press Cambridge. 
[11] Rosi Braidotti. 2019. A theoretical framework for the critical posthumanities. 
Theory, Culture & Society 36, 6 (2019), 31–61. 
[12] Taina Bucher. 2018. If... then: Algorithmic power and politics. Oxford University 
Press. 
[13] Judith Butler. 2002. Gender Trouble. Routledge. 
[14] Gregory Cajete. 1994. Look to the Mountain: An Ecology of Indigenous Education. 
Kivaki Press. 
[15] Rosemary Candelario. 2019. Dancing the Space: Butoh and Body Weather as 
Training for Ecological Consciousness. In The Routledge Companion to Dance 
Studies. Routledge, 11–21. 
[16] Chia-chen Chang, Gwyneth Jia Yi Cheng, Thi Phuong Le Nghiem, Xiao Ping 
Song, Rachel Rui Ying Oh, Daniel R Richards, and L Roman Carrasco. 2020. Social 
media, nature, and life satisfaction: global evidence of the biophilia hypothesis. 
Scientifc Reports 10, 1 (2020), 4125. 
[17] Dianne Chisholm. 2011. The Art of Ecological Thinking: Literary Ecology. ISLE: 
Interdisciplinary Studies in Literature and Environment 18, 3 (10 2011), 569–593. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/isle/isr077 
[18] Lorraine Code. 2006. Ecological Thinking: The Politics of Epistemic Location. 
Oxford University Press. 
[19] Sarah Cogos, Marie Roué, and Samuel Roturier. 2017. Sami Place Names 
and Maps: Transmitting Knowledge of a Cultural Landscape in Contempo-
rary Contexts. Arctic, Antarctic, and Alpine Research 49, 1 (2017), 43–51. 
https://doi.org/10.1657/AAAR0016-042 
[20] Claire Colebrook. 2014. Death of the PostHuman: Essays on Extinction, vol. 1. 
Open Humanities Press. 
[21] Aykut Coskun, Nazli Cila, Iohanna Nicenboim, Christopher Frauenberger, Ron 
Wakkary, Marc Hassenzahl, Clara Mancini, Elisa Giaccardi, and Laura Forlano. 
2022. More-than-human Concepts, Methodologies, and Practices in HCI. In 
Extended Abstracts of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (New Orleans, LA, USA) (CHI EA ’22). Association for Computing 
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 150, 5 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/ 
3491101.3516503 [22] Maria Puig de La Bellacasa. 2017. Matters of Care: Speculative Ethics in More 
than Human Worlds. Vol. 41. University of Minnesota Press. 
[23] Gilles Deleuze. 1994. Diference and Repetition. Columbia University Press. 
[24] Vinciane Despret. 2016. What would Animals Say If We Asked the Right Questions?
University of Minnesota Press. 
[25] John Dewey. 2002. Human Nature and Conduct. Courier Corporation. 
[26] Dohee Lee. 2023. Dohee Lee’s Ofcial Website. https://www.doheelee.com/ 
[27] Michele Elam. 2022. Signs Taken for Wonders: AI, Art & the Matter of Race. 
Daedalus 151, 2 (2022), 198–217. https://doi.org/10.1162/daed_a_01910 
[28] Michele Elam. 2023. Poetry Will Not Optimize; or, What Is Literature to AI? 
American Literature 95, 2 (2023), 281–303. 
[29] José Luis Encarnação Emile H.L. Aarts. 2006. True Visions: The Emergence of 
Ambient Intelligence. Springer, Germany; Berlin Heidelberg. 
[30] Alan Page Fiske, Shinobu Kitayama, Hazel Rose Markus, and Richard E Nisbett. 
1998. The cultural matrix of social psychology. In The handbook of social 
psychology, Vols. 1-2, 4th ed. McGraw-Hill, 915–981. 
[31] Joshua Friedland. 2019. AI Can Help Us Live More Deliberately. MIT Sloan 
Management Review 60, 4 (2019), 45–51. 
[32] Xiao Ge, Chunchen Xu, Daigo Misaki, Hazel Rose Markus, and Jeanne L. Tsai. 
2024. How Culture Shapes What People Want From AI. In Proceedings of the 
2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Honolulu, HI, 
USA) (CHI ’24). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 
1–15. https://doi.org/10.1145/3613904.3642660 
[33] Kenneth J. Gergen. 1992. The Social Constructionist Movement in Modern 
Psychology. In The Restoration of Dialogue: Readings in the Philosophy of Clinical 
Psychology, Richard B. Miller (Ed.). American Psychological Association, 556– 
569. https://doi.org/10.1037/10112-044 
[34] Susan Grifn. 1978. Women and Nature: The Roaring Inside Her. Harper and 
Row, New York. 
[35] Yrjö Haila. 2000. Beyond the Nature-Culture Dualism. Biology & Philosophy 15 
(2000), 155–175. 
[36] Matthew Hall. 2011. Plants as persons: A philosophical botany. Suny Press. 
[37] Donna Haraway. 2013. A cyborg manifesto: Science, technology, and socialist-
feminism in the late twentieth century. In The transgender studies reader. Rout-
ledge, 103–118. 
[38] Donna J Haraway. 2016. Staying with the trouble: Making kin in the Chthulucene. 
Duke University Press. 
[39] Graham Harvey. 2005. Animism: Respecting the living world. Columbia University 
Press. 
[40] Harriet Hawkins. 2023. Imagine! Creating Earth Futures? https: 
//shc.stanford.edu/stanford-humanities-center/events/harriet-hawkins-
imagine-creating-earth-futures 
[41] Katie Hoemann, Maria Gendron, Alyssa N Crittenden, Shani Msafri Mangola,
Endeko S Endeko, Èvelyne Dussault, Lisa Feldman Barrett, and Batja Mesquita. 
2024. What we can learn about emotion by talking with the Hadza. Perspectives 
on Psychological Science 19, 1 (2024), 173–200. 
[42] Andrew J. Hofman and Lloyd E. Sandelands. 2005. Getting Right with Nature: 
Anthropocentrism, Ecocentrism, and Theocentrism. Organization & Environ-
ment 18, 2 (2005), 141–162. https://doi.org/10.1177/1086026605276150 
[43] bell hooks. 1981. Ain’t I a Woman: Black Women and Feminism. South End Press, 
Boston. 
[44] bell hooks. 2000. Feminist Theory: From Margin to Center. Pluto Press. 
[45] Alf Hornborg. 2019. Animism, Relationism, and the Ontological Turn. In Nature, 
Society, and Justice in the Anthropocene: Unraveling the Money-Energy-Technology 
Complex, Alf Hornborg (Ed.). Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 208–230. 
[46] Nikki Goth Itoi. 2022. AI and Sustainability: Will AI Help or Perpetuate Climate 
Crisis? https://hai.stanford.edu/news/ai-and-sustainability-will-ai-help-or-
perpetuate-climate-crisis 
[47] Petra Jääskeläinen, André Holzapfel, and Cecilia Åsberg. 2022. Exploring More-
than-Human Caring in Creative-Ai Interactions. In Nordic Human-Computer 
Interaction Conference (Aarhus, Denmark) (NordiCHI ’22). Association for Com-
puting Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 79, 7 pages. https://doi.org/10. 
1145/3546155.3547278 
[48] Theo Jansen. 2008. Strandbeests. Architectural Design 78, 4 (2008), 22–27. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/ad.701 
[49] Willis Jenkins. 2020. Listening for Coastal Futures: The Conservatory Project. 
Living Earth Community (2020), 141. 
[50] Elvin Karana, Holly McQuillan, Valentina Rognoli, and Elisa Giaccardi. 2023. 
Living artefacts for regenerative ecologies. Research Directions: Biotechnology 
Design 1 (2023), e16. https://doi.org/10.1017/btd.2023.10 
[51] Katherine C Kellogg, Melissa A Valentine, and Angele Christin. 2020. Algorithms 
at work: The new contested terrain of control. Academy of Management Annals 
14, 1 (2020), 366–410. 
[52] Robin Wall Kimmerer. 2013. Braiding Sweetgrass: Indigenous Wisdom, Scientifc 
Knowledge, and the Teachings of Plants. Milkweed Editions. 
[53] Shinobu Kitayama and Yuchida Uchida. 2005. Interdependent agency: An alter-
native system for action. Cultural and social behavior: The Ontario symposium 
AI as a Child of Mother Earth: Regrounding Human-AI Interaction in Ecological Thinking 
10 (2005), 137–164. 
[54] Carl Knappett and Lambros Malafouris. 2008. Material agency: towards a non-
anthropocentric approach. Springer. 
[55] Eduardo Kohn. 2013. How forests think: Toward an anthropology beyond the 
human. University of California Press. 
[56] Simone Kotva. 2021. How can we be close to nature? https://youtu.be/ 
C5QFZVIDjEs?si=WDUoCbWn6IjSkpjw Accessed on December 11, 2023. 
[57] Simone Kotva. 2022. Efort and Grace: On the Spiritual Exercise of Philosophy. 
Bloomsbury Publishing. 
[58] Bruno Latour. 2007. Reassembling the social: An introduction to actor-network-
theory. Oup Oxford. 
[59] Dohee Lee. 2023. Workshop during the 2023 course (Conjure Art 101: Perfor-
mances of Ritual, Spirituality and Decolonial Black Feminist Magic) at Stanford 
University. 
[60] Sherilyn MacGregor. 2011. Beyond mothering earth: Ecological citizenship and 
the politics of care. UBC Press. 
[61] Andreas Malm and Alf Hornborg. 2014. The geology of mankind? A critique of 
the Anthropocene narrative. The anthropocene review 1, 1 (2014), 62–69. 
[62] Michael Marder. 2013. Plant-thinking: A philosophy of vegetal life. Columbia 
University Press. 
[63] Michael Marder. 2016. Through vegetal being: Two philosophical perspectives. 
Columbia University Press. 
[64] Hazel Rose Markus and MarYam G Hamedani. 2019. People are culturally shaped 
shapers: The psychological science of culture and culture change. In Handbook 
of cultural psychology, D Cohen and & S Kitayama (Eds.). The Guilford Press, 
11–52. 
[65] Hazel Rose Markus and Shinobu Kitayama. 1991. Culture and the self: Implica-
tions for cognition, emotion, and motivation. Psychological Review 98 (1991), 
224–253. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.98.2.224 
[66] Hazel Rose Markus and Shinobu Kitayama. 2010. Cultures and selves: A cycle of 
mutual constitution. Perspectives on psychological science 5, 4 (2010), 420–430. 
[67] Hazel Rose Markus and Shinobu Kitayama. 2014. Culture and the self: Implica-
tions for cognition, emotion, and motivation. In College student development 
and academic life. Routledge, 264–293. 
[68] Marcel Mauss. 2000. The gift: The form and reason for exchange in archaic societies. 
W.W. Norton & Company. 
[69] Deborah McGregor, Steven Whitaker, and Mahisha Sritharan. 2020. Indigenous 
environmental justice and sustainability. Current Opinion in Environmental 
Sustainability 43 (2020), 35–40. 
[70] Katie McShane. 2007. Anthropocentrism vs. nonanthropocentrism: Why should 
we care? Environmental Values 16, 2 (2007), 169–185. 
[71] Douglas Medin, Brian Ojalehto, Ananda Marin, and Megan Bang. 2017. Systems 
of (Non-) Diversity. Nature Human Behaviour 1, 5 (2017), 0088. https://doi.org/ 
10.1038/s41562-017-0088 
[72] Elisa D. Mekler and Kasper Hornbæk. 2019. A Framework for the Experience 
of Meaning in Human-Computer Interaction. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Glasgow, Scotland Uk) 
(CHI ’19). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–15. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300455 
[73] Carolyn Merchant. 1980. The Death of Nature: Women, Ecology, and the Scientifc 
Revolution. Harpercollins. 
[74] Carolyn Merchant. 1981. Earthcare: Women and the environment. Environment: 
Science and Policy for Sustainable Development 23, 5 (1981), 6–40. 
[75] Walter D. Mignolo and Catherine E. Walsh. 2018. On Decoloniality: Concepts, 
Analytics, Praxis. Duke University Press. 
[76] Timothy Morton. 2010. The Ecological Thought. Harvard University Press. 
[77] Christine Moser, Frank den Hond, and Dirk Lindebaum. 2022. Morality in the 
age of artifcially intelligent algorithms. Academy of Management Learning & 
Education 21, 1 (2022), 139–155. 
[78] Arne Naess. 1973. The Shallow and the Deep, Long-Range Ecology Movement: 
A Summary. Inquiry 16, 2 (1973), 95–100. 
[79] Arne Naess. 1984. A defence of the deep ecology movement. Environmental 
ethics 6, 3 (1984), 265–270. 
[80] Gemma Newlands. 2021. Algorithmic surveillance in the gig economy: The 
organization of work through Lefebvrian conceived space. Organization Studies 
42, 5 (2021), 719–737. 
[81] Iohanna Nicenboim, Elisa Giaccardi, Marie Louise Juul Søndergaard, Anu-
radha Venugopal Reddy, Yolande Strengers, James Pierce, and Johan Redström. 
2020. More-Than-Human Design and AI: In Conversation with Agents. In Com-
panion Publication of the 2020 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference 
(Eindhoven, Netherlands) (DIS’ 20 Companion). Association for Computing Ma-
chinery, New York, NY, USA, 397–400. https://doi.org/10.1145/3393914.3395912 
[82] Luke Pearson. 2021. Hilda: A Netfix Original Series. https://www.hildatheseries. 
com/ 
[83] Val Plumwood. 2002. Feminism and the Mastery of Nature. Routledge. 
[84] Jedediah Purdy. 2015. After Nature: A Politics for the Anthropocene . Harvard 
University Press. CHI EA ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA 
[85]
 Ronald E. Purser, Changkil Park, and Alfonso Montuori. 1995. Limits to An-
thropocentrism: Toward an Ecocentric Organization Paradigm? Academy of 
Management Review 20, 4 (1995). https://doi.org/10.5465/amr.1995.9512280035 
[86] Markus Reichstein, Gustau Camps-Valls, Bjorn Stevens, Martin Jung, Joachim 
Denzler, Nuno Carvalhais, and fnm Prabhat. 2019. Deep learning and process 
understanding for data-driven Earth system science. Nature 566, 7743 (2019), 
195–204. 
[87] Paolo Remagnino and Gian Luca Foresti. 2004. Ambient intelligence: A new 
multidisciplinary paradigm. IEEE Transactions on systems, man, and cybernetics-
Part A: Systems and humans 35, 1 (2004), 1–6. 
[88] Daniela K Rosner. 2018. Critical fabulations: Reworking the methods and margins 
of design. MIT Press. 
[89] Seung Sahn, Stephen Mitchell, Jane McLaughlin, JDPSN, and Paul Muenzen. 
1992. The whole world is a single fower : 365 kong-ans for everyday life. C.E. 
Tuttle Co. https://cir.nii.ac.jp/crid/1130000797406110848 
[90] Donald A Schön. 2017. The refective practitioner: How professionals think in 
action. Routledge. 
[91] Astrid Schwarz and Kurt Jax. 2011. Etymology and Original Sources of the 
Term “Ecology”. Ecology revisited: refecting on concepts, advancing science (2011), 
145–147. 
[92] John Seed and Dailan Pugh. 1988. Thinking like a mountain: Towards a council 
of all beings. New Society Publishers. 
[93] Helaine Selin. 2013. Nature across cultures: Views of nature and the environment 
in non-Western cultures. Vol. 4. Springer Science & Business Media. 
[94] George Sessions. 1987. The Deep Ecology Movement: A Review. Envi-
ronmental Review 11, 2 (1987), 105–125. https://doi.org/10.2307/3984023 
arXiv:https://doi.org/10.2307/3984023 
[95] Vandana Shiva. 2016. Staying alive: Women, ecology, and development. North 
Atlantic Books. 
[96] Suzanne Simard. 2021. Finding the mother tree: Uncovering the wisdom and 
intelligence of the forest. Penguin UK. 
[97] Isabelle Stengers. 2018. Another science is possible: A manifesto for slow science. 
John Wiley & Sons. 
[98] Marilyn Strathern. 1988. The gender of the gift: problems with women and 
problems with society in Melanesia. University of California Press. 
[99] Sanaz Talaifar and Brian S Lowery. 2023. Freedom and Constraint in Digital 
Environments: Implications for the Self. Perspectives on Psychological Science 18, 
3 (2023), 544–575. 
[100] Suzanne C Gagnon Thompson and Michelle A Barton. 1994. Ecocentric and 
anthropocentric attitudes toward the environment. Journal of environmental 
Psychology 14, 2 (1994), 149–157. 
[101] Barton H Thompson Jr. 2023. Liquid Asset: How Business and Government Can 
Partner to Solve the Freshwater Crisis. Stanford University Press. 
[102] Gulden Uchyigit and Matthew Y Ma. 2008. Personalization techniques and 
recommender systems. Vol. 70. World Scientifc. 
[103] Karen J Warren. 1990. The power and the promise of ecological feminism. 
Environmental ethics 12, 2 (1990), 125–146. 
[104] Vanessa Watts. 2013. Indigenous place-thought and agency amongst humans 
and non humans (First Woman and Sky Woman go on a European world tour!). 
Decolonization: Indigeneity, Education & Society 2, 1 (2013). 
[105] Alfred North Whitehead. 2010. Process and reality. Simon and Schuster. 
[106] Wesley J Wildman. 2010. An introduction to relational ontology. The Trinity 
and an entangled world: Relationality in physical science and theology (2010), 
55–73. 
[107] Cary Wolfe. 2010. What is posthumanism? University of Minnesota Press. 
[108] Daisy Yoo, Tilde Bekker, Peter Dalsgaard, Eva Eriksson, Simon Skov Fougt, 
Christopher Frauenberger, Batya Friedman, Elisa Giaccardi, Anne-Marie Hansen, 
Ann Light, Elisabet M. Nilsson, Ron Wakkary, and Mikael Wiberg. 2023. More-
Than-Human Perspectives and Values in Human-Computer Interaction. In 
Extended Abstracts of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (Hamburg, Germany) (CHI EA ’23). Association for Computing Machin-
ery, New York, NY, USA, 3 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3544549.3583174 
[109] Shoshana Zubof. 2023. The age of surveillance capitalism. In Social Theory 
Re-Wired. Routledge, 203–213. 
