Traveling Arts x HCI Sketchbook: Exploring the Intersection 
Between Artistic Expression and Human-Computer Interaction 
Makayla Lewis 
m.m.lewis@kingston.ac.uk 
Kingston University, London 
United Kingdom 
Mauro Toselli 
mauro.toselli@gmail.com 
Independent Artist, Italy 
United Kingdom 
Josh Urban Davis 
josh.u.davis.gr@dartmouth.edu 
Dartmouth Department of Computer 
Sciences 
USA 
Ernesto Priego 
Ernesto.priego.1@city.ac.uk 
Centre for HCI Design, City, 
University of London 
United Kingdom 
Eli Blevis 
eblevis@indiana.edu 
Luddy School of Informatics, 
Computing, and Engineering, Indiana 
University, Bloomington 
USA 
Corey Ford 
c.j.ford@qmul.ac.uk 
Queen Mary University of London 
United Kingdom 
Kirsikka Kaipainen 
kirsikka.kaipainen@tuni.fi 
Tampere University 
Finland 
Mirjam Palosaari Eladhari 
mirjam@dsv.su.se 
Department of Computer and System 
Sciences, Stockholm University 
Sweden Miriam Sturdee 
ms535@st-andrews.ac.uk 
University of St Andrews 
United Kingdom 
John Miers 
j.miers@kingston.ac.uk 
Kingston University, London 
United Kingdom 
Swen E Gaudl 
swen.gaudl@ait.gu.se 
University of Gothenburg 
Sweden 
Kim Snooks 
k.snooks@lancaster.ac.uk 
Imagination Lancaster (LICA), 
Lancaster University 
United Kingdom 
Nicola Privato 
nicola@lhi.is 
Intelligent Instruments Lab, Iceland 
University of the Arts 
Iceland 
Nick Bryan-Kinns 
n.bryankinns@arts.ac.uk 
Creative Computing Institute, 
University of the Arts London 
United Kingdom 
Caroline Claisse 
caroline.claisse@newcastle.ac.uk 
Open Lab, Newcastle University 
United Kingdom 
Anna Troisi 
a.troisi@arts.ac.uk 
CCI Creative Computing Institute, 
University of the Arts London 
United Kingdom Denise Lengyel 
Denise.Lengyel@newcastle.ac.uk 
Open Lab, Newcastle University 
United Kingdom 
Violet Owen 
r.v.owen@lancaster.ac.uk 
Imagination Lancaster (LICA), 
Lancaster University 
United Kingdom 
Lanxi Xiao 
tarolancy@gmail.com 
Academy of Arts & Design, Tsinghua 
University 
China 
Laia Turmo Vidal 
laiatv@kth.se 
Dept. Media Technology and 
Interaction Design, KTH Royal 
Institute of Technology 
Sweden 
Patricia Piedade 
patricia.piedade@tecnico.ulisboa.pt 
Interactive Technologies Institute, 
University of Lisbon 
Portugal 
Beatriz Severes 
beatrizseveres@tecnico.ulisboa.pt 
Faculty of Exact Sciences and 
Engineering, University of Madeira 
Portugal 
Raksanda Mehnaz Huq 
raksanda.huq@city.ac.uk 
Centre for HCI Design, City, 
University of London 
United Kingdom 
Ana O Henriques 
ana.gfo.henriques@campus.ul.pt 
Interactive Technologies Institute, 
University of Lisbon 
Portugal 

Ar Grek 
togrek@protonmail.com 
Independent Researcher 
Israel 
Sara Nabil 
sara.nabil@queensu.ca 
iStudio Lab, Queen’s University 
Canada 
Andrey V. Vlasov 
avvlasov@hse.ru 
HSE University 
Russian Federation 
Silvia Carderelli-Gronau 
bristolensemble@gmail.com 
Dance Department, Bath Spa 
University 
United Kingdom Gareth McMurchy 
g.mcmurchy2@newcastle.ac.uk 
Open Lab, Newcastle University 
United Kingdom 
Jacinta Jardine 
jjardine@tcd.ie 
Trinity College Dublin 
Ireland 
Yana Knight 
yana.knight@dsv.su.se 
DSV, Stockholm University 
Sweden 
Claudia Núñez-Pacheco 
cnunezpacheco@gmail.com 
Umeå University 
Sweden 
Jean-Philippe Rivière 
riviere-jp@univ-nantes.fr 
Nantes University 
France RAY LC 
LC@raylc.org 
School of Creative Media, City 
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong 
United Kingdom 
Robert Collins 
robert.collins@umu.se 
Umea University 
Sweden 
Michele Cremaschi 
mcremaschi@inf.unibz.it 
Free University of Bozen-Bolzano 
Italy 
Gisela Reyes-Cruz 
gisela.reyescruz@nottingham.ac.uk 
University of Nottingham 
United Kingdom 
ABSTRACT 
When thinking of arts in HCI, one might be tempted to keep one’s 
eyes focused on prominent realms such as sketching for UX Design 
and design probes from participants. A closer look shows that prac-
tices go beyond this, involving a variety of arts-based expressions 
by researchers, the researched and third parties, e.g. graphic facilita-
tors. Inspired by Toselli’s Sketchnote Army Travelling Sketchbook, 
researchers and artists contributed to a ’Travelling Sketchbook 
for Arts in HCI’, showcasing their arts-based practice in HCI. The 
resulting sketchbook explores the intersection between HCI and 
artistic expression, illuminating what it means to use art in HCI. 
It shows the breadth of Arts in HCI, illustrating the many fruit-
ful possibilities for extending existing research and dissemination 
methods in HCI. It also calls into question current practices, which 
often do not recognise the significance of artist attribution, and, in 
turn, advocates for equal authorship between principal researchers 
and contributing artists. 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation 
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored. 
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s). 
CHI EA ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA © 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). 
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0331-7/24/05 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3613905.3644069 CCS CONCEPTS 
• Human-centered computing → Human computer interac-
tion (HCI). 
KEYWORDS 
sketching; arts; sketchbooks; video; animation; making; drawing; 
painting; digital art; 
ACM Reference Format: 
Makayla Lewis, Miriam Sturdee, Denise Lengyel, Mauro Toselli, John Miers, 
Violet Owen, Josh Urban Davis, Swen E Gaudl, Lanxi Xiao, Ernesto Priego, 
Kim Snooks, Laia Turmo Vidal, Eli Blevis, Nicola Privato, Patricia Piedade, 
Corey Ford, Nick Bryan-Kinns, Beatriz Severes, Kirsikka Kaipainen, Car-
oline Claisse, Raksanda Mehnaz Huq, Mirjam Palosaari Eladhari, Anna 
Troisi, Ana O Henriques, Ar Grek, Gareth McMurchy, RAY LC, Sara Nabil, 
Jacinta Jardine, Robert Collins, Andrey V. Vlasov, Yana Knight, Michele 
Cremaschi, Silvia Carderelli-Gronau, Claudia Núñez-Pacheco, Gisela Reyes-
Cruz, and Jean-Philippe Rivière. 2024. Traveling Arts x HCI Sketchbook: Ex-
ploring the Intersection Between Artistic Expression and Human-Computer 
Interaction. In Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (CHI EA ’24), May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA. ACM, 
New York, NY, USA, 14 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3613905.3644069 
1 ARTIST ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
To the artists who have opted not to be included in the author 
list, your contributions are of equal value to those in the author 
list. Thus, the acknowledgement section has been moved from the 
customary end of the paper to the beginning; we would like to 
thank Joaquín R. Díaz Duràn, Francisco de la Mora, Natalia 
Traveling Arts x HCI Sketchbook CHI EA ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA 
Figure 1: [Left] Example rough storyboard by Miriam. [Right] Final version during inking (right). This was later developed into 
a full page comic for ACM Interactions magazine’s new sketch-based feature [17]. Note the visible differences between the first 
draft and the final, which was signed off by the editors. Miriam Sturdee, 2023. 
Pérez, Em Harmsen, and Sue Nichols for contributing to Art in 
HCI Travelling Sketchbook. 
2 OPENING COMMENTARY 
This AltCHI paper advocates for an equal approach to authorship 
between principal researchers and contributing artists. The absence 
of the artists would render the narrative of Arts in HCI incomplete, 
while the lack of principal researchers (who are also artists) would 
impede the analysis of artwork. Recognising the significance of 
artist attribution, this AltCHI paper suggests that the equitable 
recognition of creative input is crucial for fostering a sense of value, 
respect, and fairness within the Arts in the HCI community. We 
identify an issue within the SIGCHI templates: few authors and re-
stricted incorporation of visual elements that are supportive rather 
than constitutive of the narrative [18]. In response to this limitation, 
this AltCHI paper ensures each artist’s adequate representation 
(authorship). Consequently, this AltCHI paper cannot conform to 
the stipulated 8–12-page length (excluding references) to accom-
modate our inclusive authorship model. Regrettably, the font size 
has been reduced to five to adhere to the page length constraints. 
We hope this compromise demonstrates our commitment to the 
significance of this research, the ethos of authorship, and the visi-
bility of imagery remains unwavering. Thus, to view this paper you 
may need to utilize accessibility software such as a screen reader 
or magnifier. 3 INTRODUCTION 
Sketchbooks are used by artists (professionals and hobbyists) for art 
practice, lived experiences, and experimentation, e.g. trying differ-
ent approaches to drawing hands, observational studies, sketching 
ideas for potential future artwork and blueprints (mapping out 
work) before starting the final artwork; they enable the artist to 
put pen/paint brush/photographs/sketches etc. or even creative 
notes on paper or digital canvas; it is a tool and practice that en-
courages habitual creativity [4, 9], e.g. see Figure 1. It is often a 
solitary and private space to express oneself without a need for 
perfection. A sketchbook lets the lucky viewer glimpse the artist’s 
creative process in a personal and inspiring way. However, these 
creative pages are usually found years after the artist has died, e.g. 
Leonardo da Vinci’s flying machines. With the rise of technology, 
especially social media, sketchbook pages and collated artworks 
have become more readily available as blog/social media posts1 , 
books, and papers [11, 12, 19] by the artist. These collections are 
often themed (e.g. [7, 8, 15]) or artist’s independent publications (e.g. 
[10] and 2) These artists offer glimpses into their creative process to 
“showcase their work, connect with their audience, and expand their 
reach”. The Art in HCI Travelling Sketchbook explores the inter-
section between HCI and artistic expression – what does it mean 
to be an artist in HCI? Which art forms are being used? Are they 
text-, image- or performance-based or hybrids [2]? Are participants 
1www.joseartgallery.com/articles/what-social-media-platform-is-better-for-artists
2www.frannerd.cl/work/ugly-sketchbooks 
CHI EA ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA Lewis et al. 
actively involved in art-making or is art-making mainly used by 
the researchers themselves as described for example, in Barone and 
Eisner [1]? And if the latter, are those trained and actively practic-
ing artists or not, which McNiff [14] discussed as a prerequisite to 
conduct arts-based research? 
3.1 Inspiration 
In 2016, Mauro Toselli (author) launched the Sketchnote Army Trav-
elling Sketchbook, a 112-page handmade notebook; its purpose was 
to gather 1-page contributions from sketchnote artists worldwide, 
“I love the idea of the community sharing something real, some-
thing we can touch and create in some ways a contact closer than 
those we use to have through the Internet”. The contributions were 
gathered between 15/09/2016 till 24/09/2023 (Days: 2565); The phys-
ical sketchbook traveled a distance of 90385 km, which involved 
39 stops (locations: 37, countries: 21 and continents: 4); 106 con-
tributions (94 unique sketchnoters). Contributors and the public 
watched the book fill up via social media #SABookjourney and via 
a world map (see Figure 2). The result was a beautiful collection 
of sketchnotes depicting how the creative approach is used and 
the mediums used. It gives awareness of the influential practice of 
Sketchnoting. It has also fostered a rich and active community of 
sketchers with respect, love, and creativity at its heart. Makayla and 
Miriam (authors) were contributors (see Figure 2) who were greatly 
inspired by the concept; they wondered what is happening in the 
HCI x Arts space: what medium is the community using, what are 
they using art for, and, of course, we want us (and now you) to 
get a unique glimpse of a page of their HCI sketchbook. During 
one of the meetings of their local SIGCHI chapter ‘Arts in HCI’, 
they discussed this with other chapter members, including Denise 
(author), and the three of them decided to follow up on this idea 
with a digital traveling ‘Arts in HCI’ sketchbook, inviting people to 
share their explorations of and in the realm of arts-based methods, 
their research and practices employing the use of arts in HCI, from 
arts appreciation to arts participation, from tech design ‘in the now’ 
to speculative, futuristic design fictions, from text- to image- and 
performance-based approaches to anything in between and/or any 
delicious compote mixing them. 
4 METHOD 
The co-authors (HCI researchers, students, and artists) were in-
vited to contribute various art forms, ranging from sketches and 
illustrations to performances, music, comics, videos, collages, etc. 
Invitations to contribute were sent via mailing lists, social media, 
and research interests. The contributions were optional. The art-
work was collected using an online collaborative whiteboard Miro; 
the inclusive approach facilitated global engagement. Contribu-
tors were asked to respond to a prompt, ’What does art in HCI 
mean/look like to you?’. Stock photos from Pexels that depicted 
a wide range of art practices were included; their purpose was 
to show that any art form could be submitted (see Figure 3 left). 
Each contribution was accompanied by essential metadata: author 
name, email, author institution, artwork caption, artwork name, 
and artwork alternative text (see Figure 3, middle). The Miro board 
remained open for two months, allowing participants ample time to 
contribute their artistic creations. This extended timeframe aimed to accommodate diverse schedules and time zones, thus cultivating 
a comprehensive and representative collection of artwork. 
4.1 Analysis 
A comprehensive analysis of the thirty-nine submissions revealed 
diverse artistic expressions within the HCI community. The Travel-
ing Arts in HCI Sketchbook traveled 116337 Km (Figure 3, right). 
There were fifteen sketches/illustrations, two performances, one 
music composition, six comics, three videos, one collage, three de-
sign processes, six photographs, one analogue-made object, four 
technologically aided, and seven computer-generated or supported 
artworks. Many of the submissions were hybrid (integrating mul-
tiple artistic elements), for example, the music contribution was 
accompanied by photographs and a video performance. The amalga-
mation complements the fluidity and interconnectedness of various 
creative forms that HCI researchers, students, and artists practice. 
Figures 5 to 10 show the contributions; they can also be viewed 
on Miro (www.miro.com/app/board/uXjVMpkw7Ns=/?share_link_ 
id=361870028909). The contributions were anonymised (metadata 
removed) by Author 1 and added to a blank Miro board. Authors 
2 and 3 assessed each contribution, adding reactions under ten 
words; contributions could have more than one reaction. Reactions 
were the materials used and what the authors saw and felt when 
looking at the artwork. This collaborative, real-time discussion used 
an affinity diagramming approach [6, 13], whereby codes (n=28) 
and 4 themes were identified: Creation & Creativity, Being & Belong-
ing, Making Sense of the World, and, Toward the Future (see Figure 
10). Upon completion, author 1 took part in a trustworthiness test; 
its purpose was to ‘sense check’ the reactions, codes, and themes 
whereby disagreements were discussed and adjusted accordingly. 
5 REFLECTIONS 
5.1
 Creation & Creativity 
We noticed that the materiality of submitted artworks, as well as 
the artefacts they show, showed great variety, ranging from fully 
hand-made to fully digitally made approaches as well as many of the 
possible hybrids along the continuum between the two. Meanings 
were expressed in direct, written or drawn or performed, form but 
also communicated through other forms of expression, e.g. through 
the advised use of colours and textures as well as other forms, in-
cluding icons and symbols, patterns and lines. We also noticed a 
plethora of arts-based approaches, from text-based ones like descrip-
tions and annotations as well as calligraphy, to image-based ones 
like painting, photography, sketching and drawing, to performance-
based ones like dance, music, theatre and roleplay, to hybrids like 
calligraphy, games/play and comics; the latter two heavily featuring 
in the submission. Also, aspects of storytelling stood out in many 
if not all art-based artefacts, such as (elements representing) narra-
tion and perspective, e.g. through the depiction/provision of story 
paths. Upon closer inspection, we also noticed that the artefacts 
presented as well as the ‘Arts in HCI’ represented in them were 
created by researchers as well as participants (with both groups 
containing artists and non-artists) and third parties (e.g. illustra-
tors, dancers, storytellers or musicians), showing that art-making 
in HCI actively employs a wide range methodological approaches, 
Traveling Arts x HCI Sketchbook CHI EA ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA 
Figure 2: [Left to Right, Top to Bottom] Sketchnote Army Travelling Sketchnote Book creator holding the completed book, 
Mauro Toselli, 2023; Maps of the route of Sketchnote Army Travelling Sketchnote Book, Mauro Tosseli, 2023; ‘Lancaster’ 
entry to Sketchnote Army Travelling Sketchnote Book, Miriam Sturdee, 2017; ‘London’ entry to Sketchnote Army Travelling 
Sketchnote Book, Makayla Lewis, 2017. 
such as participatory and autoethnographic ones as well as graphic 
facilitation. 
5.2 Being & Belonging 
Within the context of HCI we still centre the human, our wellbeing, 
and the world around us. This theme also touches upon the ‘more 
than human’ in that we acknowledge both our own existential 
tensions, but those of the natural world around us. The human is 
a complex being, with emotional needs as well as practical ones, 
and many of our sub-themes consider inclusivity and accessibil-
ity. The analyses surfaced both essential needs (food, water) but 
also outlined the complexities of being, the negative emotions that 
seep into everyday existence (frustration, loneliness). It also speaks 
of the importance of cultural connection, between nationalities, 
and between demographic groups and generations. Timelines and 
change feature heavily in the analysis, showing transitions, meta-
morphoses, sometimes between species (animals acting as humans) 
or connecting devices and technology with living beings as if cy-
borg. This theme suggests that Human Computer Interaction is a 
means to help us navigate the world around us, a tool, rather than the focus of our research. At the same time we are drawn to the 
sense of entropy that being human engenders. 
5.3 Making Sense of the World 
Artworks were focused on and provoked reflections on the world 
through the process and products of art-making In addition to 
visual/image-based approaches, this was also embodied, utilising 
gesture, touch and movement, as well through textual approaches 
such as calligraphy and written/typed annotations. We also ob-
served reflections on the process of creating artefacts described via 
composition and doing words, such as overlaying and connecting 
elements, leaving traces and following schemata. And we observed 
reflections on the methodological aspects underlying and/or sup-
porting art-making, noticing especially the diversity of arts-based 
and other approaches and methods employed, including image-, 
text-and performance-based approaches as well as mixtures thereof 
such as in comics and cartoons. In addition, we registered many 
passionate responses in the form of calls for action, calls for reflec-
tion, the expression of surprise and frustration or conflict as well as 
metaphorical musings, including exclamations such as “technology 
CHI EA ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA Lewis et al. 
Figure 3: Left: Traveling Arts x HCI Sketchbook on Miro www.miro.com/app/board/uXjVMpkw7Ns=/?share_link_id= 
361870028909. Right: Extract for journey of the Traveling Arts in HCI sketchbook on Google, starting in the UK then hopping 
to EU and the rest of the world 
Figure 4: Affinity diagram and discussion notes www.miro.com/app/board/uXjVNMeQ0-Q=/?share_link_id=568749316191]. 
is a tool – people matter”, “time to rethink technology?”, “to make 
is human”, “emptiness where it was full of life before”, “entropy 
comes for us all”, “the dance of penmanship” and “forming music 
like clay on a wheel”. 
5.4 Toward the Future 
As artists, we often navigate the realm of the speculative, jump-
ing into uncharted territories of the future through artistic ex-
pression. Noteworthy instances include Leonardo da Vinci’s 
sketches of flying machines, whose futurism unexpectedly re-
sembles early helicopters of the 20th century, or Michelan-
gelo Caravaggio’s 1597-1599 ‘Narcissus’ https://artsandculture. google.com/entity/caravaggio/m020bg?hl=en, an early explo-
ration of the expressionistic practice, now known as the 
‘selfie’. This sentiment was further echoed by Andy Warhol 
in 1968: “In the future, everyone will be world-famous for 
15 minutes” www.smithsonianmag.com/smart-news/andy-warhol-
probably-never-said-his-celebrated-fame-line-180950456/. It fur-
ther materialized in their 1978 ‘Self Portrait with Strangulation’, 
envisioning a future where the camera lens captures our eyes and 
our impending mortality, not what we see. The contemporary world 
in which we now live is marked by the influence of social media, 
where hundreds of millions engage in the daily ritual of sharing 
imagery and videos in which they are narrative; they seek elusive 
and fleeting fame. Artists’ speculation has never been so prevalent; 
Traveling Arts x HCI Sketchbook CHI EA ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA 
Figure 5: [Left to Right, Top to Bottom] Trying to find a space for arts in HCI. Makayla Lewis, 2023; HCI is about people, not 
technology. We need to focus on that rather than computing as a solo field. Miriam Sturdee, 2023. The Virtual World: Major 
Arcana Card Design from the Deleted World Tarot. Josh Urban Davis, 2022; Individuals’ material circumstances often mean 
they cannot benefit from the proposed benefits of new HCI Systems or technologies ( [5] p.641). John Miers, 2022; Sonic Dancer: 
Designing Through Your Voice and Pens. Swen Gaudl and Silvia Carderelli-Gronau, 2023; “Living with Covid” While Clinically 
Vulnerable: A Real-Life Story. Story by Natalia Pérez and Ernesto Priego. Art by Francisco de la Mora. Natalia Pérez, Ernesto 
Priego, and Francisco de la Mora, 2022. 
CHI EA ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA Lewis et al. 
Figure 6: [Left to Right, Top to Bottom] HCI that enhances HHI (Human-Human) interaction. Anna Troisi, 2023; Creating 
Playful Comics Together with AI. Yana Knight, 2023; “Do Not Fold, Spindle or Mutilate” – this project explored visualising how 
websites track you by producing punch cards adorned with the names of common ’cookies’ one might encounter while browsing 
the web. Using punch cards – an outdated method of data collecting and processing – as a metaphor to make this digital data 
tangible, it is easier to understand how these data can accumulate quickly over time, their function as processable pieces of 
information, and present an opportunity for agency over what happens to this data. Gareth McMurchy, 2021; Designing future 
sustainable interactions using GenAI, RAY LC, 2022; Human: Ethical Reflection on Future Cyberworld Identity. Lanxi Xiao, 
2020; Tomato Screen Saviour. Violet Owen, 2023; Breaking the Surface Using Hands and Body to Think and Express. Denise 
Lengyel, 2023. 
Traveling Arts x HCI Sketchbook CHI EA ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA 
Figure 7: [Left to Right, Top to Bottom] Methodology for creating Comic to present Interaction Design. Raksanda Mehnaz Huq, 
2023; Meditative Flora. This speaks of the ephemeral rewards in practice-based research. By Claudia Núñez-Pacheco (2012); 
Fabulations of future social wearables. Laia Turmo Vidal, 2023; Designing Interactive Furniture and Wallart with Dual-Identity. 
Sara Nabil, 2020; The Conspiracy Capitaliser: A retro-speculative interface for AI which allows the user to produce novel 
conspiracies embedded in advertisements. An artefact for exploring problematic ethics in AI through interaction. Robert 
Collins, 2023; Going from scribbles to final artwork. Ana Henriques, 2023; Exploring digital identity futures. Kim Snooks, 2023; 
Conducting User-Centered Design/ideation session with contemporary dancers. Rivière Jean-Philippe, 2018-2019. Joakinator, 
Interactive Interface for reflecting through the body. Joaquín Roberto Díaz Durán, 2020 to 2023. 
CHI EA ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA Lewis et al. 
Figure 8: [[Left to Right, Top to Bottom] Multimodal attention. This collaborative work was created as a printed collage, the 
content of the collage was created based on generative AI prompts. The artwork was first conceptualized, then generative 
images and texts were selected, human editing and 2D design were also used. Andrey V. Vlasov, 2022-2023; Illustrating Research 
Practice, a collection of iPad scribbles for and from field studies. Patricia Piedade, 2022 – 2023; Multilingual teenagers’ images 
of digital devices. Sue Nichols, 2023; Conducting User-Centered Design / ideation session with contemporary dancers. Rivière 
Jean-Philippe, 2018-2019; (Re)envisioning telepresence robotics from [16]. ISOTTA - Intelligent System for Organic Tweeting 
and Thoughtful Artistry. Michele Cremaschi, 2023 [3] 
the rise of technology such as AI, machine learning, XR, and VR 
occupies a prominent space in the minds and practices of today’s 
artists. Many artworks shared a thematic emphasis on Sci-Fi (rang-
ing from dystopia to utopian visions) that were often entangled in pop culture. The artistic expressions in this AltCHI paper often 
featured representations of technology, interactions with devices 
and social media, and speculations of the potential future inter-
nally and externally. Including technology from the past is a nod to 
Traveling Arts x HCI Sketchbook CHI EA ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA 
Figure 9: [Left to Right, Top to Bottom] Humans were made for dancing. Jacinta Jardine, 2023; The design & documentation 
process. Em Harmsen, 2023; The Steampunk Mechanical Bunny: a fantasy contraption that expresses concepts related to 
Technology by depicting it in a realistic or even conceptual way to trigger emotions in the viewer and convey a message that, 
very often, transcends the aesthetics and goes beyond the artwork, to be provocative and to create the so-called Experience. 
Mauro Toselli, 2021; Japan Gawa Meeting 2023. Comic poster. A. Grek, 2023; Polyqin. Nick Bryan-Kinns, 2019; Top: When we 
build games, we do it together, over borders, and we build on a history older than the first written words. This painting is based 
on a number of symbols - Egyptian hieroglyphs, blueprints of microchips, and ancient board games. Bottom: This is a painting 
of a group of i4004s. They are 3 in/on a motherboard that they perceive as a marsh. The microprocessor Intel 4001 (i4004)is a 
4-bit central processing unit (CPU). Mirjam Palosaari Eladhari, 2023; This street photograph is a photo-ethnographic account of 
residents playing mahjong in a physical world community center in Rui An (Zhejiang Province, China). The authenticity of 
the scene contrasts with virtual world gatherings. The image falls into the category of storytelling and context as a matter of 
visual communication germane to notions of community. The quality of the photograph as photographic Artwork also matters, 
wherein the natural light and colours in the scene bridge the physical world and its digital representation to create a surreal 
effect. Eli Blevis, 2012. 
CHI EA ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA Lewis et al. 
Figure 10: [Left to Right, Top to Bottom] Illustrations were created in response to a workshop where participants shared their 
experiences of living with HIV (individuals’ journeys and supported the researcher’s sense-making) as part of UKRI-funded 
INTUIT project. Caro Claisse, 2020; Imagining sustainable futures for older adults through tabletop role-playing. Kirsikka 
Kaipainen, 2023; Reflection as a work in progress in the design process. Beatriz Severes, 2023; Picking away at the blocks. Corey 
Ford, 2023; Mouja, or the Magnetic Ouja. Performance with Magnetic Scores and Neural Synthesis. Nicola Privato, 2023. 
incorporating the increasingly forgotten analogue machines. The 
artistic expression of dystopia and utopian worlds suggests com-
bining machines, resulting in different outcomes. Soon, will artists 
work with machines? Will artists be supported by machines? or will artists fight the machines to rejuvenate analogue? This AltCHI 
paper cannot answer, but it identifies a transformative shift that 
requires further dialogue: should we embrace, reject, or confront 
the future? 
Traveling Arts x HCI Sketchbook CHI EA ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA 
6 INVITATION TO REFLECT AND 
CONTRIBUTE TO THE TRAVELLING ARTS X 
HCI SKETCHBOOK 
We invite you to view and reflect on the Travelling Arts in HCI 
Sketchbook (see figures 5 to 10); we then ask, if you prefer, to 
contribute by responding to the question, ’What does art in HCI 
mean/look like to you? We invite you to use the same template used 
by the authors (see Figure 11). We, the arts in the HCI community, 
want to expand on our understanding, further build our community, 
continue the dialogue, and provide a glimpse of our creative practice 
for artists and non-artists in the HCI community. Please share your 
response on the Arts in HCI Travelling Sketchbook Miro Board or 
using the #ARTxHCI hashtag on social media. 
6.1 IMAGE COPYRIGHT STATEMENT: 
These images are presented here for viewing purposes only. They 
are not royalty-free images and may not be used for commercial 
or private use. Any such use of these images is strictly prohibited. 
These images may not be copied, manipulated, reproduced by any 
other means, nor sold without prior written consent by the author. 
6.2 FUNDING STATEMENT: 
The research is in part funded by the Centre for Digital Citizens 
(EP/T022582/1). For the purpose of Open Access, the authors apply a 
CC BY public copyright license to any Author Accepted Manuscript 
(AAM) version arising from this submission. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Corey Ford is supported by the EPSRC UKRI Centre for Doctoral 
Training in Artificial Intelligence and Music (AIM) [EP/S022694/1]; 
Caro Claisse is supported by the EPSRC UKRI INTUIT project 
[EP/R033900/2]; Center for Digital Citizens [EP/T022582/1]; Ana 
O. Henriques is supported by the European project DCitizens (GA 
101079116) and the FCT project UIDB/50009/2020; Laia Turmo Vidal 
is supported by Sweden’s Digital Futures Research Center through 
a postdoctoral fellowship (nr 81501); Language and Learning Tran-
sitions of New Arrival Youth’ (Nichols, Caldwell & Yoshida, 2019) 
was funded by a Smolicz Foundation grant, administered by the 
Multicultural Education and Languages Committee of South Aus-
tralia; Jacinta Jardine is supported by the Irish Research Council 
(EBPPG/2020/53); Claudia Núñez Pacheco’s research is funded by 
the Wallenberg AI, Autonomous Systems and Software Program’ 
– Humanities and Society (WASP-HS) funded by the Marianne 
and Marcus Wallenberg Foundation; The Conspiracy Capitaliser: 
This work is part of the DCODE project. The project has received 
funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and 
innovation programme under the Marie Skłodowska-Curie grant 
agreement No. 955990; Beatriz Severes is receiving funding from 
the Portuguese Foundation for Science and Technology (FCT) under 
grant 2023.05034.BD; Michele Cremaschi’s work was supported by 
Sineglossa and the National Recovery and Resilience Plan (NRRP), 
- Mission 4, Component 2 - Investment 3.3 - call for tender No. 352 
of 09/04/2022 of the Italian Ministry of University and Research, 
funded by the European Commission under the NextGeneration 
EU programme; Patricia Piedade is supported by the Portuguese REFERENCES 
Figure 11: Arts x HCI Contribution response template. Please 
scan the QR code or follow the link www.miro.com/app/ 
board/uXjVNMeQ0-Q=/?share_link_id=976424183640 to add 
to your response to the Traveling Arts in HCI Sketchbook. 
Recovery and Resilience Program (PRR), IAPMEI/ANI/FCT under 
Agenda C645022399-00000057 (eGamesLab), through the schol-
arship BL195/2023-IST-ID, the European project DCitizens (GA 
101079116) and the FCT project UIDB/50009/2020. For the purpose 
of Open Access, the authors apply a CC BY public copyright li-
cense to any Author Accepted Manuscript (AAM) version arising 
from this submission. For the purpose of Open Access, the authors 
apply a CC BY public copyright license to any Author Accepted 
Manuscript (AAM) version arising from this submission. 
[1] Tom Barone and Elliot Eisner. 2012. Arts-based educational research. In Handbook 
of complementary methods in education research. Routledge, 95–109. 
[2] Ardra L. Cole and J. Gary Knowles. 2008. Arts-Informed Research. In Handbook 
of the Arts in Qualitative Research: Perspectives, Methodologies, Examples, and 
CHI EA ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA Lewis et al. 
Issues
, J. Gary Knowles and Ardra L. Cole (Eds.). SAGE, 55–70. 
[3] Michele Cremaschi, Maria Menendez-Blanco, and Antonella De Angeli. 2023. 
ISOTTA-A Slow Exploration of Power Relations in Writing with Language Models. 
In Proceedings of the 15th Biannual Conference of the Italian SIGCHI Chapter. 1–5. 
[4] Monica J David. 2023. The Practice of a Sketchbook: A Curriculum . Ph. D. Disser-
tation. The University of Iowa. 
[5] Dan Goodley. 2013. Dis/entangling critical disability studies. Disability & Society 
28, 5 (2013), 631–644. 
[6] Gunnar Harboe and Elaine M Huang. 2015. Real-world affinity diagramming 
practices: Bridging the paper-digital gap. In Proceedings of the 33rd annual ACM 
conference on human factors in computing systems. 95–104. 
[7] Steven Heller. 2012. Comics sketchbooks: the unseen world of today’s most 
creative talents. (2012). 
[8] Steven Heller and Lita Talarico. 2011. Typography sketchbooks. Thames & Hudson. 
[9] Shun Young Kim. 2014. The Illustrator’s Sketchbook: A study of The Creative Process 
through Drawing, Engraving and Printmaking. Fashion Institute of Technology, 
State University of New York. 
[10] Eva-Lotta Lamm. 2013. Sketchnotes 2012: Volume 1. 1 (2013). 
[11] Makayla Lewis, Miriam Sturdee, Mafalda Gamboa, and Denise Lengyel. 2023. 
Doodle away: an autoethnographic exploration of doodling as a strategy for self-
control strength in online spaces. In Extended Abstracts of the 2023 CHI Conference 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–13. 
[12] Makayla Lewis, Mauro Toselli, Ruth Baker, Julia Rédei, and Claire Elisabeth 
Ohlenschlager. 2022. Portraying what is in front of you: virtual tours and on-
line whiteboards to facilitate art practice during the COVID-19 pandemic. In Proceedings of the 14th Conference on Creativity and Cognition. 350–363. 
[13] Andrés Lucero. 2015. Using affinity diagrams to evaluate interactive prototypes. 
In Human-Computer Interaction–INTERACT 2015: 15th IFIP TC 13 International 
Conference, Bamberg, Germany, September 14-18, 2015, Proceedings, Part II 15. 
Springer, 231–248. 
[14] Shaun McNiff. 2008. Art-based Research. In Handbook of the Arts in Qualitative 
Research: Perspectives, Methodologies, Examples, and Issues, J. Gary Knowles and 
Ardra L. Cole (Eds.). SAGE, 29–40. 
[15] Steven Peterman and Sara Elands Peterman. 2015. The sketchbook project world 
tour. Chronicle Books. 
[16] Eike Schneiders, Andriana Boudouraki, Gisela Reyes-Cruz, Juan Pablo Mar-
tinez Avila, Houda Elmimouni, Jens Emil Sloth Grønbæk, Sean Rintel, and Swapna 
Joshi. 2023. Mobility and Utility in Robot Mediated Interaction: An Interactive 
Workshop for the Identification of Use Cases and Affordances of Telepresence 
Robots. In Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on Mobile Human-
Computer Interaction. 1–5. 
[17] Miriam Sturdee. 2023. Rage Against the AI Machine: A Sketch in Time. Interac-
tions 30, 5 (2023), 8–9. 
[18] Miriam Sturdee, Jason Alexander, Paul Coulton, and Sheelagh Carpendale. 2018. 
Sketch & the lizard king: Supporting image inclusion in HCI publishing. In 
Extended Abstracts of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems. 1–10. 
[19] Miriam Sturdee, Makayla Lewis, Angelika Strohmayer, Katta Spiel, Nantia Kouli-
dou, Sarah Fdili Alaoui, and Josh Urban Davis. 2021. A plurality of practices: 
artistic narratives in HCI research. In Creativity and Cognition. 1–14. 
