Who am AI? – Mapping Generative AI Impact and Transformative
Potential in Creative Ecosystems
Mattia Thibault
Tampere University
Tampere, Finland
mattia.thibault@tuni.fiTimo Kivikangas
Tampere University of Applied
Sciences
Tampere, Finland
timo.kivikangas@tuni.fiRiku Roihankorpi
Tampere University
Tampere, Finland
riku.roihankorpi@tuni.fi
Petri Pohjola
Tampere University of Applied
Sciences
Tampere, Finland
petri.pohjola@tuni.fiMarkus Aho
Tampere University of Applied
Sciences
Tampere, Finland
markus.aho@tuni.fi
Figure 1: AI generated visualisation of the Creative Industries
ABSTRACT
Generative AI’s emergence reshapes creative ecosystems, present-
ing diverse prospects and trials. As these systems adjust to AI’s
inclusion, equilibrium is disrupted, influencing workers and society.
A proactive cross-sectoral approach becomes crucial in navigat-
ing this transformation, harnessing AI’s potential for sustainable
growth. This poster proposes two dimensions relevant to map the
possible impacts of AI on the creative sector: the impact of AI on
the Industry from a perspective of labour, professionalisation, and
management and the Actor Network status of AI in creative ef-
forts. This marks an initial step in a cross-disciplinary endeavor
to comprehend and guide the evolution of creative ecosystems,
underlining the necessity for comprehensive data engagement and
broad academic collaboration.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
Mindtrek ’23, October 03–06, 2023, Tampere, Finland
©2023 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0874-9/23/10.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3616961.3617804CCS CONCEPTS
•Applied computing →Arts and humanities ;•Computing
methodologies→Artificial intelligence ;•Human-centered
computing→Human computer interaction (HCI) .
KEYWORDS
Artificial Intelligence, GPT, Large Language Models, Creative In-
dustries, Cultural Production
ACM Reference Format:
Mattia Thibault, Timo Kivikangas, Riku Roihankorpi, Petri Pohjola, and Markus
Aho. 2023. Who am AI? – Mapping Generative AI Impact and Transfor-
mative Potential in Creative Ecosystems. In 26th International Academic
Mindtrek Conference (Mindtrek ’23), October 03–06, 2023, Tampere, Finland.
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 6 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3616961.3617804
1 INTRODUCTION
The cultural and creative industries do not operate in a vacuum, but
are part of "creative ecosystems" that are constantly affected by and
engaged in other sectors. Technology, manufacturing, service pro-
duction, and public and private management all play an important
part in defining such ecosystems. Their cross-sector nature is ripe
with opportunities for growth, new innovations, and sustainable
solutions that include and address the global transitions of ecology,
344

Mindtrek ’23, October 03–06, 2023, Tampere, Finland Thibault et al.
digitality, and social sustainability. At the same time, the complex
interaction between their elements make innovations difficult to
predict, and the ecosystems more complex to manage.
Currently, the discussions on the creative sector’s upcoming chal-
lenges and options focus strongly on the development of generative
AI. This technology makes use, for example, of Large Language
Models, Transformer Models, and Stable Diffusion to generate im-
ages, videos, audio, text, and 3D models, based on a pre-existing
body of data that is used to train the AI to recognize and mimic
patters based on statistical relations. Different Generative AI prod-
ucts, such as Chat GPT and Bard (for textual creation), Dall-E and
Midjourney (for image creation) and Google Translate and DeepL
(for translation) have become part of the daily lives and professional
toolboxes of millions of people around the world.
Generative AI brings along concerns related to copyright, fair
and ethical treatment of materials and sources as well as the fu-
ture of the sector’s diverse professions, social agency, and income
logics[ 14] These are decisive topics also for the technology sector, as
many digital production tools and methods are already used cross-
sectorally, e.g. in game design, 3D modelling and printing, digital
twins,UX, XR, and AI design, smart city development, education
and so forth.
We currently witness a "summer” season of AI[ 8], with increas-
ing hype, and investments. While we do not know how long it
will last, during this period of enthusiasm a series of tools is being
developed and increasingly put in use, promising a strong impact
on the creative ecosystems when it comes to generation, manage-
ment, and use of media, established professional and working life
structures, educational settings, and many more. Many of these
tools promise to revolutionize the ways in which we work, generate
meaning and commodities, and thrive across industries. They offer
new ways to simplify one’s tasks, to support creative thinking and
to illustrate ideas, but they also open up many questions related to
their impact on existing careers and industries, the technical needs
and limitations of the technologies, and the ethical dimensions of
their use.
The impact of generative AI on the creative industries is already
noteworthy, and current developments suggests it will be even more
so in the future. In this poster we aim to propose some avenues for
mapping and understanding such impact, in the belief that scholars
and professionals need to take on a proactive role in managing and
directing the transformations that are running through the cultural
and creative sector.
2 STATE OF THE ART
The latest innovations in AI have sparked lively public debates on
the topic. Reactions to Generative AI vary from the apocalyptic to
the enthusiastic[ 6]. The first side focuses on the risks connected to
AI use, starting from legitimate ethical concerns[ 29] and fears on
effects on labor[ 11] to possible existential threats to humanity[ 26].
Enthusiasts, instead, focus on the possibilities opened by AI, in
fields such as medicine[ 16], education[ 32], architecture[ 30] and
more.
It is probably impossible to forecast or assess the future impact
of Generative AI on the creative ecosystems. Predictive models
seem to suggest that it will affect a large array of occupations (morethan robotics and software development have in the part) and that
high-skill occupations will be the ones most exposed to artificial
intelligence[ 31]. A literature review by OECD focusing on the last
ten years of AI development suggests that adoption of the technol-
ogy seemingly did not provoke an overall decline in employment
and wages in exposed professions[ 17]. The review claims AI gen-
erally causes a reorganization of tasks in an occupation instead,
changing the content, environment and design of jobs (ibid.). More
creative approaches to future making, such as speculative design,
have also been used to explore the possible impact of AI. Such
design fictions argue that AI might lead, for example, to a “tokeni-
sation” of human agency - a scenario in which human behaviour
and choices can be reduced to token that are predictable by AI,
enhancing possibilities of collaboration with artificial teammates,
but also advancing the possibility of replacing human workers and
decision makers[22].
Outside of academia, the ability to create and edit audiovisual
(AV) and media content with high-quality results using only natu-
ral language text prompts is saluted as a game-changer. Advanced
generative AI tools are often accessible globally. Consequently,
the potential user base for this technology is vast. While many
reports choose to focus on the potential benefits related to eco-
nomic growth[ 11], AI seems to offer new challenges, as it expands
the kinds of tasks that can be automated (beyond non-cognitive
tasks), it is general purpose, and therefore affect every sector, and
is developing at unprecedented speed[24].
Rapid automation obviously rises concerns related to job loss.
A report made for the UK government, for example, estimates
the job loss at 7% between 2021-2026, increasing to 30% by 2041.
The same research, however, claims that AI development will also
contribute to job creation. Some professions in particular might be
more susceptible to these changes. Music production is one of such
fields, with 73% of professionals believing that their jobs will be
lost to AI[27].
While the future is uncertain, there are attempts to program
it, for example by including generative AI in models of industrial
development in the Industry 5.0 framework. While Industry 4.0
(or " fourth industrial revolution") focused on the digital transfor-
mation of manufacturing and production and their impact on the
value creation process1, the Fifth industrial revolutions explores the
potential of AI and smart machines. Industry 4.0 refers to the intel-
ligent networking of machines and processes for industry with the
help of information and communication technology. It represents a
new stage in the organization and control of the industrial value
chain whose key driver is "Profit", with main drivers of optimiza-
tion of productivity, product quality assurance and predictability
of maintenance.
As a continuation, Industry 5.0 innovates both the tools at dis-
posal of the industry - to include AI and smart machines - and
the key drivers - focusing also on "People" and "Planet" . It thus
acknowledges and attempt to respond to the ongoing green, digi-
tal, and social sustainability transitions especially relevant to the
creative ecosystems.
1Industry 4.0 and the fourth industrial revolution are explained at i-scoop.eu
345
Who am AI? – Mapping Generative AI Impact and Transformative Potential in Creative Ecosystems Mindtrek ’23, October 03–06, 2023, Tampere, Finland
3MAPPING TRANSFORMATIVE DIMENSIONS
The impacts of generative AI on the creative ecosystems promise to
be multifaceted, complex and ambiguous, with both great opportu-
nities and challenges for all the industries and professions involved.
If anticipating such changes might be impossible, we argue for the
necessity of continuous monitoring of its evolution as well as for a
proactive role of academics and professionals to guide such impact
towards the most desirable outcomes.
To contribute to this effort, we propose here some possible maps
of the transformative dimensions of generative AI, based on previ-
ous studies and on the Industry 5.0 model. In order to create the
basis for an holistic perspective on the future of AI in the creative
ecosystems, we focus on two key dimensions: the impact of AI on
the Industry from a perspective of labour, professionalisation, and
management and the Actor Network status of AI in creative efforts.
3.1 AI’s Industrial and Labour Impact
Generative AI is quickly finding many areas of application in dif-
ferent industries. Its adoption often proceeds in a bottom up way,
as workers integrate it in their workload, or as a reaction to its
effects on a specific field. In both cases, the adoption soon starts
to impact working life, reshaping workloads, changing practices,
requiring new skills and so forth. This, in turn, requires an effort
of management to deal with this changes, by providing guidelines,
educational pathways, opportunities of professional transition, re-
structuring of workloads etc. We can summarise these impacts as
follows:
(1) Areas of AI application in different industries
(2) AI’s impact on working life transformation
(3)Management of AI in related social / professional transitions
Figure 2: Three levels of industrial and labour impact of
Generative AI
To explicate these points and test our mapping, we will now
apply to one creative sectors that has been dealing with AI for
decades: translation. Translation practice and translation studies
have been assessing the impact on AI in their industries for a long
time, as the first examples of computer-based translations date fromthe half of the last century. Machine Translation (MT) has been
one of the first applications of AI in the creative industries, and
has deeply affected the tasks, perspectives, studies and practices of
translation.
(1) Areas of AI application in different industries The progress
of MT in the last decade made it an accepted tool not only for the
translation of technical texts, but also for creative ones[ 25], a testa-
ment to the increasing quality of AI-translated texts. Nevertheless,
the possibility of errors often makes human intervention necessary,
distinguishing two main areas of application: one that can make use
of unedited MT, and those requiring post-editing. Unedited MT is
used in texts necessitating real-time communication (email support,
live chat, social media posts, customer reviews) or to facilitate agile
localization (websites in many languages, YouTube subtitles)[ 3].
Post-editing, instead, is used for high-quality content publication,
as in the case of marketing, creative texts and the arts[9].
(2) AI’s impact on working life transformation There is consid-
erable research on the impact of MT on the professionals work-
ing in the translation industry. While the industry is being re-
shaped by several factors, such as the multiplication of digital la-
bor platforms[ 7] or efforts of crowd-sourcing[ 2], MT has become
one unavoidable dimension of the profession. The prevalence and
increasing presence of MT in workflows have been recorded for
almost a decade[ 9], but this does not make AI adoption an inevitabil-
ity. There are several factors that contribute to the adoption of MT
in translation projects, which are not limited to economic benefits
and opportunity[ 15]. Ergonomic factors related to a human trans-
lators’ needs, skills, limitations, and overall well-being have been
found decisive in the adoption of MT[4].
(3) Management of AI in related social / professional transitions
The impact of MT goes beyond the mere professional practices of
translators. Machine translated texts are produced, in large quanti-
ties, by non-professionals making use of Google Translate in their
businesses or daily life. This naive use of MT has been reported as
problematic, especially in cases from the legal and medical fields. A
literature review on use cases in these areas has underlined the need
for a broad societal level of awareness on the strengths and, more
importantly, limitations of MT. The current use and understanding
of MT, the study argues, exacerbates social inequalities and poses
grave risks for vulnerable communities[28].
The impact of AI on the translation industry, briefly showcased
here within the frame of our mapping, highlights an important
shortcoming of the current, reactive , model. The adoption of AI
technologies is made inevitable by market pressures that push for
speed and efficiency, and the consequences are dealt with at a
later point. The results are not necessarily catastrophic, but they
can still be damaging, especially for vulnerable professionals and
communities. We argue, therefore, that the three steps outlined in
our mapping should be programmatically re-ordered, with the third,
related to management being moved to the very beginning. The
adoption of generative AI in creative ecosystems should be guided
by clear objectives. This guidance, however, cannot be pursued in
a purely top down way, which brings us to the second dimension
of our mapping efforts.
346
Mindtrek ’23, October 03–06, 2023, Tampere, Finland Thibault et al.
3.2 AI’s Actor Network Status
According to Actor Network Theory[ 19] machines are nodes of
social relations non dissimilar from human beings. If a door[ 20]
can be an agent in an actor network, the agency of generative AI
seems to present significant overlaps with that of human beings.
Due to this, we can articulate the status of AI in Actor Networks,
according to their relation with human agency, according to four
main types:
•Expanding Human Agency
•Replacing Human Agency
•Cloning Human Agency
•Surpassing Human Agency
Generative AI expands human agency when it is used as a tool,
or "companion", that allows human workers to do things better or
faster. Tools that expand human agency might accomplish some of
the tasks in place of a human being, but they are only part of the
overall workflow. For example, MT needing post-editing would fall
into this category. These tools are used in many creative ecosystems.
For example, in the music industry many artists use AI as a mean to
discover novel musical elements, like new sounds and rhythms [ 12].
Game designers have also been using generative AI to generate new
characters design or visual styles, or to transform 2D renderings
into 3D models2. Beyond games, AI 3D object generators make
the process of creating such models more efficient, accurate, and
accessible to everyone. The list of uses could easily go on, and
the existence of many lists of AI tools for art generation, text-to-
music, game development, coding and more3is a testament of the
widespread use of generative AI to expand human agency.
AIreplaces human agency when it can do the same work a hu-
man would do, without requiring the presence of a human. When
enough tasks of a work can be delegated to AI, or when the fi-
nal quality does not necessarily need human supervision (as in
automatic generated translated subtitles), AI can replace human
agents. In some field such as architecture it allows to automate an
entire design package, from initial options to construction[ 21]. The
Harvard Business Review claims that a GPT text creator named
Jesper can replace humans entirely in producing autonomously
social media posts, blog entries and other types of customer-facing
content[ 5]. Forbes reports that several educational tasks can be
completely delegated to AI, such as generating tests, study plans
and personalised feedback[ 1]. Human actors can also be simulated
through AI. The "Digital People Platform", for example, allows to
create talking avatars to interact with4. The risk of AI replacing
media professionals was among the concerns behind the strikes of
the SAG-AFTRA and the Writers Guild of America in 2023, both
asking for regulations concerning consent and ownership over ones
voice, appearance and work.
Generative AI clones human agency when it does not replace
a generic human agent, but a specific one. Deepfakes, allowing
to reproduce to looks and voices of existing individuals and to
create new materials with them. The phenomenon started often as
2Adrien Logut, “Introduction to Procedural Generation plugin in UE5.2,” series of
videos aimed to kick-start people using the Procedural Content Generation plugin,
Epic Games Dev Community, June 18, 2023.
3Respectively at: https://bit.ly/AIArtGn, https://bit.ly/AItxt2Mus,
https://bit.ly/AIGameDev, and https://bit.ly/AICodeTool
4https://www.d-id.com/a meme-generating activity, and as unauthorised use of celebrities
voices to generate new songs featuring famous artists, or to change
the lyrics of classic songs[ 10]. Now, however, it is making a strong
entry in the entertainment business, with Alphabet and Universal
Music negotiating a deal over the use of AI deepfakes[ 23]. The
possibility to "clone" artists has also been labeled as the creation of
"digital twins", trained on actors’ archives of film, to simulate their
voice, inflections, movement and expressions at any stage of their
life and career [18].
AIsurpasses human agency when it accomplishes a task that
would be impossible for a human agent to do. AI can sometimes go
beyond being faster and more efficient, but also able to do things
that human agents can’t. In architecture AI has been claimed to
be beyond humans in terms of strategic thinking and real-time
analysis[ 28]. AI agents can also be embedded in software, some-
thing human agents cannot to. For example, in game design it is
possible to use generative AI to animate non-player characters,
allow them to respond more naturally to customised players’ input
[13].
With this - unexhaustive - list we wanted to showcase the variety
of positions that AU agents can hold in the Actor Networks of the
creative ecosystems. Different positions, in turn, will have different
level and forms of impact on the industries related to these ecosys-
tems, and on the workflows, jobs, and practices in the field. These
positions also open a variety of ethical issues, related to the right of
autonomy, the ownership of one voice or looks, the automation of
human jobs, and so on. As with the other dimension mapped in this
poster, the need for a proactive approach to the positioning of AI
agents in different industries appear to be crucial for the thriving
of the different elements of the creative ecosystems.
4 CONCLUSIONS
Ecosystems are complex environments, characterised by a dynamic
equilibrium in which the ecosystem responds to external changes
by evolving until finding a new balance. The same can be said about
the creative ecosystems facing the innovations brought about by
the success of generative AI. In the next years, these industrial and
human environments will be thrown increasingly out of balance
by the adoption of AI agents in different positions of their Actor
Networks. This unbalance will affect workers in the industries, but
also society at large through rippling effects.
Shadow (2020/2022), a recent film adaptation from the stage by
the Australian theatre group Back to Back Theatre, suggests that
the future of AI will blatantly teach those of us without disabil-
ity diagnoses to avow the default shortcomings inherent in the so
called normal human capacities. AI’s new normal will be about
negotiating the status and value of human–generated information,
creativity, and content across the media, and about deciding how to
evaluate, employ and benefit from those generated by AI. The task
will not be easy. Generative AI’s tendency to map out, choose and
exploit normative features and patterns of human media to come up
with significantly quirky and avant-garde content presents us with
fundamental questions about how creative capacities and intents
actually function, and for whom. This problematic also colours the
current discussion on AI’s further cross-sectoral impact, as oper-
ators of the cultural and creative industries are chiefly concerned
347
Who am AI? – Mapping Generative AI Impact and Transformative Potential in Creative Ecosystems Mindtrek ’23, October 03–06, 2023, Tampere, Finland
Figure 3: AI’s Actor Network Status
about the ethical reaches of allowing AI models to process human-
generated creative content without a comprehensive view of what
social and economical repercussions follow.
In the search for a new equilibrium for the creative ecosystems,
we argue firmly for the necessity of a proactive approach. By oper-
ating cross-sectorally and employing joint forces across the ecosys-
tems to tackle and the properties of generative AI (each field learn-
ing from the others), there is a chance to add value for the creative
sector and those collaborating with it. The sheer number of AI-
powered technology in the service and experience economies in
the future indicates the importance of urgent, holistic charting
of emerging AI territories with view to enhancing communica-
tion, synchronization, and learning between the industries at large.
When we move from one phase of the industrial evolution to an-
other, and from profit to sustainable profit for all ecosystems, the
role of properly researched, proactive, and creative AI may prove
to be decisive.
Our poster is but a first step in the effort to map out the present
situation from speculative, cross-disciplinary, and holistic view-
points. Other dimensions, deeper engagements with the data symp-
tomatic of AI adoption, and, crucially, a larger engagement of aca-
demics with different backgrounds are all needed if we want to
be able to monitor, direct, and guide the evolution of the creative
ecosystems.
REFERENCES
[1]Geoffrey Alphonso. 2023. Generative AI: Education In The Age Of Innova-
tion. https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbestechcouncil/2023/03/03/generative-ai-
education-in-the-age-of-innovation/?sh=40aeb9ea4eca
[2]Dimitra Anastasiou and Rajat Gupta. 2011. Comparison of crowdsourcing trans-
lation with Machine Translation. Journal of Information Science 37, 6 (2011),
637–659.
[3]Lindsay Bywood, Panayota Georgakopoulou, and Thierry Etchegoyhen. 2017.
Embracing the threat: machine translation as a solution for subtitling. Perspectives
25, 3 (2017), 492–508.
[4]Patrick Cadwell, Sheila Castilho, Sharon O’Brien, and Linda Mitchell. 2016. Hu-
man factors in machine translation and post-editing among institutional transla-
tors. Translation Spaces. A multidisciplinary, multimedia, and multilingual journal
of translation 5, 2 (2016), 222–243.[5]Thomas H. Davenport and Nitin Mittal. 2023. How Generative AI Is Chang-
ing Creative Work. https://hbr.org/2022/11/how-generative-ai-is-changing-
creative-work
[6]Umberto Eco. 2000. Apocalypse Postponed: Essays by Umberto Eco . Indiana
University Press, Bloomington.
[7]Gökhan Fırat. 2021. Uberization of translation: Impacts on working conditions.
The Journal of Internationalization and Localization 8, 1 (2021), 48–75.
[8]Enrico Francesconi. 2022. The winter, the summer and the summer dream
of artificial intelligence in law: Presidential address to the 18th International
Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Law. Artificial intelligence and law 30,
2 (2022), 147–161.
[9]Federico Gaspari, Hala Almaghout, and Stephen Doherty. 2015. A survey of
machine translation competences: Insights for translation technology educators
and practitioners. Perspectives 23, 3 (2015), 333–358.
[10] Marc Goracke. 2023. The Summer Of "Deep Drakes": How Gen-
erative AI Is Creating New Music And Copyright Issues. https:
//www.mondaq.com/unitedstates/copyright/1315692/the-summer-of-deep-
drakes-how-generative-ai-is-creating-new-music-and-copyright-issues
[11] Jan Hatzius, Joseph Briggs, Devesh Kodnani, and Giovanni Pierdomenico. 2023.
The Potentially Large Effects of Artificial Intelligence on Economic Growth.
[12] Mark Hogan. 2023. Musicians Are Already Using AI More Often Than We
Think. https://pitchfork.com/thepitch/musicians-are-already-using-ai-more-
often-than-we-think/
[13] Sean Hollister. 2023. Watch this Nvidia demo and imagine actually speaking to
AI game characters. https://www.theverge.com/2023/5/28/23740908/nvidia-ace-
demo-voice-ai-npc-game-characters
[14] Thomas Höppner Katharina Uppenbrink, Matthias Hornschuh. 2023. Authors
and Performers Call for Safeguards Around Generative AI in the European AI
Act.
[15] Maarit Koponen. 2016. Is machine translation post-editing worth the effort?
A survey of research into post-editing and effort. The Journal of Specialised
Translation 25, 2 (2016), 131–148.
[16] The Lancet. 2023. AI in medicine: creating a safe and equitable future. , 503 pages.
[17] Marguerita Lane and Anne Saint-Martin. 2021. The impact of Artificial Intelli-
gence on the labour market: What do we know so far?
[18] Nicola Laporte. 2023. How generative AI got cast in its first Hollywood
movie. https://www.fastcompany.com/90847396/generative-ai-metaphysic-
tom-hanks-robin-wright-zemeckis-here
[19] Bruno Latour. 2007. Reassembling the social: An introduction to actor-network-
theory . OUP, Oxfort.
[20] Bruno Latour et al .1992. Where are the missing masses? The sociology of a few
mundane artifacts. Shaping technology/building society: Studies in sociotechnical
change 1 (1992), 225–258.
[21] Neil Leach. 2022. Architecture in the age of artificial intelligence: an introduction
to ai for architects . Bloomsbury Publishing, London.
[22] Michael Muller, Steven Ross, Stephanie Houde, Mayank Agarwal, Fernando
Martinez, John Richards, Kartik Talamadupula, and Justin D Weisz. 2022. Drinking
Chai with Your (AI) Programming Partner: A Design Fiction about Generative
348
Mindtrek ’23, October 03–06, 2023, Tampere, Finland Thibault et al.
AI for Software Engineering. In HAI-GEN Workshop at IUI 2022: 3rd Workshop on
Human-AI Co-Creation with Generative Models . CEUR Workshop Proceedings,
Helsinki, 1–16.
[23] Anna Nicolau and Madhumita Murgia. 2023. Google and Uni-
versal Music negotiate deal over AI ‘deepfakes’. https:
//www.ft.com/content/6f022306-2f83-4da7-8066-51386e8fe63b?
accessToken=zwAGAncnxps4kc9vAiMGL4NNp9OAZlE4bo_
mOw.MEQCIEtcQxYd6J7mnRinQob2Nqfnx9yKzLKSKqq_
JRikKciKAiATLL6bDq7GeO_t95GJnwt8bmmpYtxpsAQDTZUWQdDY6w&
sharetype=gift&token=b14cb708-fb8f-4123-a005-c360c33e7a24
[24] OECD. 2023. OECD Employment Outlook 2023. Artificial Intelligence and the Labour
Market . OECD, Online. https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/sites/08785bba-en/index.
html?itemId=/content/publication/08785bba-en#section-d1e297-d5205f6f2f
[25] A Reid. 2013. Introduction to machine translation and the post-editing paradigm
shift.
[26] Kevin Roose. 2023. A.I. Poses ‘Risk of Extinction,’ Industry Leaders Warn. https:
//www.nytimes.com/2023/05/30/technology/ai-threat-warning.html
[27] Cameron Sunkel. 2023. Survey Finds 73Artificial Intelligence Will Replace
Them. https://edm.com/gear-tech/survey-music-producers-believe-ai-will-replace-them
[28] Lucas Nunes Vieira, Minako O’Hagan, and Carol O’Sullivan. 2021. Understanding
the societal impacts of machine translation: a critical review of the literature on
medical and legal use cases. Information, Communication & Society 24, 11 (2021),
1515–1532.
[29] Krzysztof Wach, Cong Doanh Duong, Joanna Ejdys, R ¯uta Kazlauskait ˙e, Pawel
Korzynski, Grzegorz Mazurek, Joanna Paliszkiewicz, and Ewa Ziemba. 2023. The
dark side of generative artificial intelligence: A critical analysis of controversies
and risks of ChatGPT. Entrepreneurial Business and Economics Review 11, 2 (2023),
7–24.
[30] Oliver Wainwright. 2023. ‘It’s already way beyond what humans can do’: will AI
wipe out architects? https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2023/aug/07/ai-
architects-revolutionising-corbusier-architecture
[31] Michael Webb. 2019. The impact of artificial intelligence on the labor market.
[32] Hao Yu and Yunyun Guo. 2023. Generative artificial intelligence empowers
educational reform: current status, issues, and prospects. In Frontiers in Education ,
Vol. 8. Frontiers, Online, 1183162.
349
