Illusory Eyescape - Exploring the Variations of Consciousness
through Generative Art and Eye-Tracking Techniques
Sin-Fei Lee
National Chengchi University
Taipei, Taiwan
0304phoebe@gmail.comMing-Te Chi
National Chengchi University
Taipei, Taiwan
mtchi@cs.nccu.edu.tw
Figure 1: The proposed interactive art installation transforms eye-tracking data to the final images. The middle image was
generated from the words "Mouse," "Apple," "Computer," "Drink," "Technical," "Art," "Animal," and "Time," with a total reading
time of 30 seconds. Each red dot represents the gaze point during a 200-millisecond interval.
ABSTRACT
Historically, art has been considered a form of expression uniquely
reserved for humans. However, technological advances, particularly
in computer graphics, have expanded the boundaries of artistic cre-
ation beyond human exclusivity. The emergence of Generative Art
in recent years has not only transformed the artistic process but has
also initiated extensive dialogues on the interactions between hu-
mans and machines. To delve deeper into this theme, we developed
an interactive art installation titled "Illusory Eyescape." This instal-
lation integrates Generative Art and Eye-tracking Technologies
to probe the fundamental nature of consciousness in humans and
machines, questioning the role of art in this new epoch of human-
machine synergy. This exploration broadens our comprehension of
the potential amalgamations of art and technology and challenges
our conventional perceptions of art.
KEYWORDS
Generative Art, Eye-tracking, Interactive Art
ACM Reference Format:
Sin-Fei Lee and Ming-Te Chi. 2024. Illusory Eyescape - Exploring the Vari-
ations of Consciousness through Generative Art and Eye-Tracking Tech-
niques. In Special Interest Group on Computer Graphics and Interactive Tech-
niques Conference Posters (SIGGRAPH Posters ’24), July 27–August 01, 2024,
Denver, CO, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2 pages. https://doi.org/10.
1145/3641234.3671068
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGGRAPH Posters ’24, July 27–August 01, 2024, Denver, CO, USA
©2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0516-8/24/07
https://doi.org/10.1145/3641234.36710681 INTRODUCTION
In the fast-paced evolution of technology, artistic forms merge and
evolve with digital techniques. Now, creating generative works
is as easy as uttering a spell. But what really lies at the heart of
artistic creation? Swiss artist Alberto Giacometti once remarked,
"The object of art is not to reproduce reality, but to create a reality
of the same intensity." In this perspective, art acts as a medium to
express genuine emotions, transcending the physical to reveal the
underlying spirit and emotions. Our work, "Illusory Eyescape," in-
vestigates the consciousness divide between humans and machines
through technological art, focusing on language’s role and limits
within generative art. Using eye-tracking technology, this inter-
active installation captures viewer engagement data, which then
drives a generative AI system to create dynamic visual artworks.
These pieces reflect and respond to viewer interactions in real-time,
deepening the understanding of human consciousness and further
contributing new insights to the integration of art and technology.
2 DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION
Historically, machine-generated art has been evaluated from a
human-centric viewpoint, treating art as fundamentally a human
creation. Utilizing Graham Harman’s Object-Oriented Ontology,
our research propose the "Object Co-Construct" concept. This ap-
proach emphasizes that art interpretation involves the co-construction
among these entities, dependent on active participant engagement.
Our work further investigates differences in human and machine
consciousness using foundational theories such as Edelman and
Tononi’s concept of human-machine consciousness divergence and
Nagel’s "bat problem". These theories underscore the unique value
of personal consciousness in human experience.
Because consciousness is deeply influenced by vision, our work
emphasizes various aspects of the eye. This includes exploring

SIGGRAPH Posters ’24, July 27–August 01, 2024, Denver, CO, USA Lee and Chi
subjective consciousness through the process of reading with the
participant’s eyes, allowing personal consciousness to be released.
We also pay homage to René Magritte’s "The False Mirror, " [Magritte
1929] which symbolizes the eye’s role in expressing. We draw from
Wittgenstein’s "Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus" [Wittgenstein and
Monk 2013] and "Philosophical Investigations" [O’Sullivan 2017] to
investigate the limitations and utility of language, exploring how
language serves as a carrier for consciousness. In designing the read-
ing material, we reference Wittgenstein’s "Language Games" and
"Family Resemblances," which underscore the inherent polysemy
of language and its contextual dependencies.
Figure 2: The design of reading materials, particularly
through dynamically changes in text style such as font size
and background color, serves as a strategy for visual cues
that directs the participant’s gaze.
To gather reading data, we employ WebGazer.js [Papoutsaki et al .
2016], an eye-tracking technology, allowing us to capture where
and how long a participant focuses on specific text. Our work
uses dynamic text styling to guide the participant’s attention. (See
Figure 2). For instance, when a word is focused on, it is magnified;
if the focus persists for one second, a black background appears
to indicate emphasis; and if the other words related to the same
"Language game" are highlighted with a gray background. The
word is stored if the focus continues for 1.5 seconds or more (See
Figure 2). This system not only enhances the reading experience
by providing intuitive visual cues but also facilitates the effective
extraction of data for consciousness research.
After capturing data, it is transmitted to a machine that simulates
the participant’s subjective consciousness and transforms it into
visual artwork (See Figure 1). We employ the text-to-image model
DALL ·E [Ramesh et al .2021] to convert consciousness into visual
forms, enabling participants to observe the flow and transformation
of consciousness visually. This process mirrors the way language
interprets the world; humans use language and formulas to un-
derstand the world, but third-person descriptions can’t fully grasp
first-person experiences. Thus, we believe that changes relate only
to its form, not its essence, which remains subjective and individual.
3 EXHIBITION
The "Illusory Eyescape" exhibition takes participants through a
four-stage experiential process: entry, reading materials, viewing
artworks, and either repeating or concluding the experience. As
they read the on-screen materials, the system tracks their eye move-
ments and extracts data, which serves as input for a text-to-imagemodel. Subsequently, the results from this model are displayed on
the main screen and within the artworks, allowing participants to
appreciate and reflect on the generated visual pieces. These art-
works can, in turn, influence the participants’ consciousness. At
the end, participants can choose to continue reading to influence
the next turn, enjoy the artworks, or end their experience.
This interaction creates a dynamic setting to explore conscious-
ness. Participants generally experience real-time transformations
of thoughts into images, although reactions vary on whether the
machine-generated images meet their expectations. This variation
underscores the subjective nature of human consciousness and the
interpretive challenges faced by machines. Through the "Illusory
Eyescape" exhibition, participants directly experience and reflect on
the differences between human and machine consciousness, leading
to a deeper understanding of how both perceive and interact with
art.
Figure 3: Photographs of the "Illusory Eyescape" Exhibition.
4 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The proposed installation aligns with the current trends in tech-
nology and art, highlighting the unique power of art to provoke
thought and challenge existing paradigms. By interacting with the
installation, the participant becomes part of the creative journey, ex-
periencing the complexity and richness of human "consciousness,"
leading them to ponder its essence. Future developments could
focus on optimizing technology, enhancing the interactive experi-
ence, and gathering more participant feedback. These efforts will
further increase the interactivity and engagement of the artworks,
ultimately enriching the participant’s overall experience.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Prof. Ya-Lun Tao for his valuable insights. This work
was supported by The National Science and Technology Council,
Taiwan, under GRANT No. NSTC 112-2221-E-004-009-MY2.
REFERENCES
René Magritte. 1929. The False Mirror . https://www.moma.org/collection/works/78938
Accessed on April 22, 2024.
Michael O’Sullivan. 2017. An Analysis of Ludwig Wittgenstein’s Philosophical Investiga-
tions . Macat Library.
Alexandra Papoutsaki, Patsorn Sangkloy, James Laskey, Nediyana Daskalova, Jeff
Huang, and James Hays. 2016. WebGazer: Scalable Webcam Eye Tracking Using User
Interactions. In Proceedings of the 25th International Joint Conference on Artificial
Intelligence (IJCAI) . AAAI, 3839–3845.
Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford,
Mark Chen, and Ilya Sutskever. 2021. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. (2021),
8821–8831.
Ludwig Wittgenstein and Ray Monk. 2013. Tractatus logico-philosophicus . Routledge.
