AI Cat Narrator: Designing an AI Tool for Exploring the Shared 
World and Social Connection with a Cat 
Zhenchi Lai Janet Yi-Ching Huang Rung-Huei Liang 
mookcherie@gmail.com y.c.huang@tue.nl liang@mail.ntust.edu.tw 
National Taiwan University of Eindhoven University of Technology National Taiwan University of 
Science and Technology Eindhoven, The Netherlands Science and Technology 
Taipei, Taiwan Taipei, Taiwan 
Figure 1: As a part of the research project, Bochan (Left), a cat, was given an Insta Go3 camera and worked with his caretaker to 
complete eight video recording tasks within two weeks. The research team used the collected video data (Middle), as well as 
input from interviews with the participants and photographs of Bochan, to create an AI Narrator cover for Bochan (Right). 
ABSTRACT 
As technology continues to advance, the interaction between hu-
mans and cats is becoming more diverse. Our research introduces 
a new tool called the AI Cat Narrator, which ofers a unique per-
spective on the shared lives of humans and cats. We combined the 
method of ethnography with fctional storytelling, using a defamil-
iarization strategy to merge real-world data seen through the eyes 
of cats with excerpts from cat literature. This combination serves 
as the foundation for a database to instruct the AI Cat Narrator 
in crafting alternative narrative. Our fndings indicate that using 
defamiliarized data for training purposes signifcantly contributes 
to the development of characters that are both more empathetic 
and individualized. The contributions of our study are twofold: 1) 
proposing an innovative approach to prompting a reevaluation of 
living alongside cats; 2) establishing a collaborative, exploratory 
tool developed by humans, cats, and AI together. 
CCS CONCEPTS 
• Human-centered computing; • Interaction design; • Systems 
and tools for interaction design; 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for proft or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation 
on the frst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the 
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or 
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specifc permission 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. 
© 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. notions about daily life with cats and encourages individuals to ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0632-5/24/07 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3656156.3663692 reevaluate these everyday experiences through a lens of creativity DIS Companion ’24, July 01–05, 2024, IT University of Copenhagen, Denmark KEYWORDS 
AI, Human-Cat Interaction, More-than human design, fction 
ACM Reference Format: 
Zhenchi Lai, Janet Yi-Ching Huang, and Rung-Huei Liang. 2024. AI Cat 
Narrator: Designing an AI Tool for Exploring the Shared World and Social 
Connection with a Cat. In Designing Interactive Systems Conference (DIS 
Companion ’24), July 01–05, 2024, IT University of Copenhagen, Denmark. 
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 5 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3656156.3663692 
1 INTRODUCTION 
As the internet and smart technologies become increasingly in-
tegrated in our daily lives, design researchers are encountering 
a broader range of design contexts. Our cat companions are also 
beginning to be engaged with these innovations. Automatic feeders 
and health-monitoring litter boxes are among such advancements, 
emerging as promising aids in pet care. These advancements have 
signifcantly changed both cats’ living conditions and the way hu-
mans interact with them. Therefore, to adequately address this 
future shift in human-cat cohabitation, designers require new tools 
and methods to explore the increasingly complex living scenarios 
that involve both humans and cats. 
The study aims to explore the shared lives of humans and cats 
using a fctional narrative approach[ 5] through an innovative tool 
called "AI Cat Narrator". The AI Cat Narrator is a tool that aims 
to create alternative narrative in the daily lives of cat and human. 
By transforming monotonous, repetitive everyday routines into 
imaginative and  fctional situations, it challenges preconceived 
224

DIS Companion ’24, July 01–05, 2024, IT University of Copenhagen, Denmark Zhenchi Lai, Janet Yi-Ching Huang, and Rung-Huei Liang 
Figure 2: (Left) Under the theme of "Deliberately capturing oneself on camera as the cat’s subject," a participant lowered her 
body posture to the ground to interact with the cat, aiming to be captured by the cat. (Middle) Under the theme of "Natural 
shooting in the absence of humans," a scene where the cat is seen eating toilet paper is captured. (Right) In the theme of 
"Persuading the cat to remain in a specifc location with humans presence," a participant placed a paper bag on the foor to 
attract the cat to a designated area. 
and newfound understanding. We utilize the narrative potential of 
Generative AI (GAI) system: ChatGPTs, to create AI Cat Narrator, 
which with a distinct personality based on the behavioral traits 
observed in the real-world cat. 
To gain deeper insights from this study, we propose two key 
research questions: 1) how are the material and social relationships 
between humans and cats formed in a cohabiting environment? 2) 
how can people be prompted to discover and refect on their relation-
ships with cats through their everyday interaction? To answer these 
questions, we combine methods of thing ethnography and fctional 
narrative, employing “defamiliarization ” [1] as a strategy to create 
an AI Cat Narrator that could inspire refection. The training data 
for this narrator came from both real-world data and fctional nar-
ratives. Our goal to create an AI Cat Narrator that encapsulates 
familiar traits recognized by cat owners, while also incorporating 
fctional elements to provoke thoughts. To achieve the goal, we col-
lected real-life video data from a cat perspective on the coexistence 
of humans and cats. We then analyzed the video data alongside 
the content of interviews conducted with the participants. From 
this, we extracted information about each cat’s personality, pref-
erences, background, and relationships with their human family 
members, and compiled this information into text documents. Fur-
thermore, the researchers selected some interesting plots from pop-
ular cat literature [9] and combine them with raw interview data, 
and the compiled data. This served as the foundation for training 
customized GPTs to create AI Cat Narrator. This work-in-progress 
paper presents preliminary fndings, emphasizing the development 
of AI Cat Narrator. It delves into the design mechanism of AI Cat 
Narrator, contributing in two ways: 1) Introducing a novel method 
to encourage an alternative perspective on cohabitation with cats; 
2) Creating a joint exploration device co-developed by humans, cats, 
and AI. 
2 PERSONALIZED AI CAT NARRATOR 
This research aims to introduce novel approaches that allow design-
ers and participants to explore the divers interactions and relation-
ships between humans and cats in everyday life, moving beyond 
the usual stereotypes associated with cats. To achieve this, we have 
developed an AI Cat Narrator which presents alternative scenarios 
of human-cat relationships, and encourages refection and critical thinking. The research process includes three stages: exploration, 
data collection, and training of the AI Cat Narrator. In the initial 
phase, to ensure the utmost comfort for the participating cats, we 
provided the human participants with an Insta Go3 camera a week 
before the start of the experiment. This gave the cats plenty of 
time to get used to the device. We also asked the participants to 
closely observe the cats’ reactions during this time. If they noticed 
any discomfort or unusual behavior, the participants were allowed 
to withdraw from the experiment at any time without any obli-
gation to continue. During the second phase, the participants and 
their cats worked together to collect video data of cat’s perspective 
within their homes. Finally, the AI Cat Narrator was developed 
using ChatGPTs, after we analyze interview data to extract themes 
related to cats for the training database. Through iterative training 
and adjustments, an AI Cat Narrator that provokes thought and 
resonance was created. 
2.1 Data Collection 
The First-Cat Perspective: Visual materials are crucial in con-
veying information, especially in the pet care industry. They are 
widely used in various products such as pet surveillance cameras 
and remote feeders, which have signifcantly improved the ef-
ciency of pet care. In felds such as thing ethnography[ 6], motor-
cycle studies[ 2], and home observation[ 3], capturing images from 
various perspectives is a common way to study environments and 
their changes over time. As such, to more efectively capture the 
daily life of cats, we conducted a detailed exploration of diferent 
shooting angles and tested it in the feld. Our pilot testing indicates 
that while the third-person perspective ofers a broad overview of 
the scene, it may overlook crucial interaction details if the shooting 
distance is too far. On the other hand, images captured from the 
frst-person perspective can ofer an interesting angle to investigate 
the daily life of cats, enabling a novel but detailed analysis of the 
social interactions between cats and people, and objects. 
The Shooting Tasks for Participants and Their Cats: Build-
ing upon critical play theory, Tan et al. [7] suggest that devising 
engaging activities and speculative scenarios through specifc pho-
tographic tasks can introduce unusual real-world situation. This 
encourages individuals to refect and engage in meaningful con-
versations. To stimulate refection and dialogue, we have prepared 
225
AI Cat Narrator DIS Companion ’24, July 01–05, 2024, IT University of Copenhagen, Denmark 
Figure 3: The Training Procedure of the AI Cat Narrator 
eight innovative photographic tasks. These tasks prompt partici-
pants to explore diferent ways to interact with their cats. The tasks 
include: 
• Natural shooting in the absence of humans 
• Natural shooting in the presence of humans 
• Deliberately capturing oneself on camera as the cat’s subject 
• Intentionally avoiding the feline subject in shots 
• Persuading the cat to remain in a specifc location with hu-
mans presence 
• Persuading the cat to remain in a specifc location without 
humans presence 
• Encouraging the cat to interact with a specifc object while 
humans are present 
• Encouraging the cat to interact with a specifc object without 
humans presence. 
Prior to the ofcial implementation of these activities, the research 
team had already tested the feasibility of the tasks in a home setting 
and made necessary adjustments. 
2.2 Training of AI Cat Narrator 
To develop an AI Cat Narrator that embodies defamiliarization [1], 
a combination of real-world data and sentences from fctional nov-
els served as the foundation for training the AI. When a material 
possesses the quality of defamiliarization, the messages it produces 
may be challenging to comprehend, enigmatic, and open to diverse 
interpretations. These circumstances typically encourage individ-
uals to actively pursue a clearer understanding of the ambiguous 
elements within the message. Therefore, this approach of mixing 
real-world and imagined data enables the AI Cat Narrator to spon-
taneously create narratives, which not only connect with users but 
also spark their imagination. Moreover, due to the user-friendly 
platform of ChatGPT for customizing models, we chose to build 
this unique cat persona using ChatGPT’s GPTs service. 
Creating training database based on real-world and fc-
tional data: We initially established key prompts for the AI Cat 
Narrator, grounded in factual information obtained from real-world 
raw data, including images sequences from videos, interview data, 
and structured data extracted from content analysis. To ensure char-
acter authenticity, we conducted interviews with the participants 
after they had fnished their photography task. These interviews, 
lasting one to two hours, aimed to capture a deeper understanding 
of the real-life situations of the cats. Through thematic analysis, 
our research team summarized the material and temporal social 
relationships between the participants and their cats. Then we thoroughly analyzed the cats’ traits, preference, behavior, and life 
patterns. The fndings were organized into several structured text 
documents according to themes, which serve as the factual data 
foundation for training the AI Cat Narrator. Due to the training 
on factual data, we noticed that AI Cat Narrator often generate 
narratives that stick to reality and are mundane, thus lacking en-
gaging personalized storytelling. To tackle this, we extended the 
training data with elements of fction, adding a layer of imagina-
tion to the original content. This enhancement involved speculated 
“pet phrases ” from their owners, and fctional narratives from cat-
themed novels, including I am a Cat [9], into the training dataset 
for shaping the cat personality. We also modify the instructions to 
ask the custom GPT to use the database of pet phrases and fctional 
narratives as a basis for creating more related content. The aim 
of this strategy is to enhance the narratives with openness and 
unpredictability, enabling the AI Cat Narrator to exhibit a more 
distinct personality and generate narratives that are intriguing and 
compelling. 
Improve training quality through the collaboration among 
AI Cat Narrator, AI Cat Evaluator and researchers: During the 
model training process, we iterated and debugged multiple times to 
create a model that meets our expectations. To improve the quality 
of the AI at model, we draw an inspiration from Generative Ad-
versarial Networks (GANs) to construct two distinct cat models: 
The AI Cat Narrator and the AI Cat Evaluator. We treated AI Cat 
Narrator as the generative model and developed the AI Cat Evalu-
ator to mirror the conditions of the AI Cat Narrator, but with an 
evaluation function. The AI Cat Evaluator was trained to scrutinize 
the content generated from the AI Cat Narrator and assess its rel-
evance to the original database content, providing its judgement 
along with a detailed reasoning for its judgement. The purpose of 
this AI evaluator was designed to help researchers optimize the de-
scriptions generated by the AI Cat Narrator. By using a model of the 
same type for evaluation, we were able to more precisely identify 
and explain potential issues or errors in the narrative generation 
process, leading to more efcient model training. Moreover, some 
tips about training AI models suggest that AI models often perform 
better when instructing GPT to externalize its thinking process or 
prompting it with signals of urgency or importance, such as emo-
tion prompts. Therefore, we integrated an emotion prompt, "This is 
very important to my career" [8], and a Zero-Shot Chain-of-Thought 
prompt, “Let’s think progress step by step”, to increase the output 
quality [8]. The results showed that the model indeed generated 
226
DIS Companion ’24, July 01–05, 2024, IT University of Copenhagen, Denmark Zhenchi Lai, Janet Yi-Ching Huang, and Rung-Huei Liang 
Figure 4: The fgure showcases the diferent outcomes of sentences generated by two versions of the AI Cat Narrator, each 
using distinct databases. AI Cat Narrator (A) produces narratives based on factual data stored in its database. On the other hand, 
AI Cat Narrator (B) integrates counterfactual data such as pet phrases and the sentences from cat fction, resulting in narratives 
that include relevant descriptions from these sources. Sentences in AI Cat Narrator (B) that are linked to novels and catchphase 
are highlighted with yellow color to emphasize their inclusion. 
content more aligned with researchers’ expectations when these 
prompting techniques were used. 
2.3 Preliminary Training Results 
To accurately present our initial result in training personalized AI 
Cat Narrators, we examined the diferences in narratives produced 
by two versions of AI Cat Narrators. The database of AI Cat Narrator 
(A) is comprised solely of factual data, while the database for AI Cat 
Narrator (B) has been augmented with pet phrases and narratives 
from novels. The analysis revealed that narratives from AI Cat 
Narrator (B), due to their incorporation of specifc phrases, more 
efectively capture and express the unique personalities of cats. For 
instance, in Fig.4-1, phrases such as "Such a coward" and "Time to 
check my gear" highlight the cats’ penchant for adventure. Moreover, 
compared to AI Cat Narrator (A), which directly describes the scenes 
in images, AI Cat Narrator (B) enhances its storytelling by weaving 
in these pet phrases and novelistic elements, creating narratives 
with deeper emotional resonance and contextual richness. This 
approach not only deepens the narrative’s complexity but also 
more strongly engages the audience’s interest. 
3 DISCUSSION & FUTURE WORK 
This study presents a method for developing an AI Cat Narrator 
capable of interpreting real-life data from a unique perspective. We 
analyzed video data collected from the viewpoint of cats to create 
a database for building the AI Cat Narrator. The collected data is categorized into two types: Factual data and Counterfactual data 
both based on individual interpretations of reality. We also inte-
grated fctional plots from novels into the AI Cat Narrator’s training 
database. The AI Cat Narrator’s defamiliarized fctional narratives 
encourage participants to discover hints about their everyday in-
teractions between humans and cats. These stories not only evoke 
memories and connections but also promote deep contemplation 
and discussion regarding the nature of reality. While attributing 
human characteristics to animals can stimulate our imagination and 
has infuenced pop culture in various media forms, this practice can 
also lead to misunderstandings about animal behavior. However, 
we propose that anthropomorphism, when used to spark intellec-
tual curiosity rather than debate the truth of fctional stories, can 
enhance our reasoning and interpretive abilities through analogy. 
For instance, scientist Seven Dijkgraaf [4] gained insights into bat 
behavior by imagining what it would be like to experience life as a 
bat. As such, we argue that employing fctional techniques to study 
human-animal interactions, with appropriate frameworks, can of-
fer designers and researchers more comprehensive perspectives 
when investigating the design of such interactions, especially those 
involving cats. For our future work, we are currently conducting 
extensive experiments and interviews to gain a deeper understand-
ing of the dynamics between humans and cats in shared living 
spaces, as well as evaluate the utility of this tool. We are currently 
engaging participants to interpret videos using the AI Cat Narrator, 
aiming to draw design insights from these varied interpretations. 
227
AI Cat Narrator 
This approach is intended to reveal design possibilities to designers 
and researchers, facilitating the development of practical solutions 
for future smart living spaces accommodating both humans and 
cats. 
4 CONCLUSION 
This paper presents an innovative tool called AI Cat Narrator, which 
ofers a fresh interpretation of everyday life from the cats’ perspec-
tive. Research fndings suggest that integrating real-world data and 
creative fctional content to construct an AI Cat Narrator results 
in the development of an AI model with unique characteristics. 
Therefore, AI Cat Narrators can create unique stories that merge 
reality with fantasy, not only stimulating people’s imagination but 
also potentially making the stories resonate with people. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Genevieve Bell, Mark Blythe, and Phoebe Sengers. 2005. Making by making strange: 
Defamiliarization and the design of domestic technologies. ACM Transactions on DIS Companion ’24, July 01–05, 2024, IT University of Copenhagen, Denmark 
Computer-Human
 Interaction (TOCHI) 12, 2 (2005), 149–173. 
[2] Wen-Wei Chang, Elisa Giaccardi, Lin-Lin Chen, and Rung-Huei Liang. 2017. " 
Interview with Things" A First-thing Perspective to Understand the Scooter’s 
Everyday Socio-material Network in Taiwan. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference 
on Designing Interactive Systems. 1001–1012. 
[3] Yu-Ting Cheng, Mathias Funk, Wenn-Chieh Tsai, and Lin-Lin Chen. 2019. Peeka-
boo Cam: Designing an Observational Camera for Home Ecologies Concerning 
Privacy. In Proceedings of the 2019 on Designing Interactive Systems Conference. 
823–836. 
[4] Frans De Waal. 2016. Are we smart enough to know how smart animals are? WW 
Norton & Company. 
[5] Audrey Desjardins and Heidi R Biggs. 2021. Data epics: Embarking on literary 
journeys of home internet of things data. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–17. 
[6] Elisa Giaccardi, Nazli Cila, Chris Speed, and Melissa Caldwell. 2016. Thing ethnog-
raphy: Doing design research with non-humans. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM 
conference on designing interactive systems. 377–387. 
[7] Neilly H. Tan, Brian Kinnee, Dana Langseth, Sean A. Munson, and Audrey Des-
jardins. 2022. Critical-playful speculations with cameras in the home. In Proceed-
ings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–22. 
[8] Cheng Li, Jindong Wang, Yixuan Zhang, Kaijie Zhu, Wenxin Hou, Jianxun Lian, 
Fang Luo, Qiang Yang, and Xing Xie. 2023. Large language models understand 
and can be enhanced by emotional stimuli. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.11760 (2023). 
[9] S¯oseki Natsume. 1906. I am a cat. Vol. 1. Hattori Shoten. 
228
