Reimagining Human-Thing Interactions Through Iterative 
Posthumanist Design Speculations 
Hyungjun Cho 
Department of Industrial Design, KAIST 
Daejeon, Republic of Korea 
lolo660@kaist.ac.kr 
ABSTRACT 
This research delves into the evolving interactions between humans 
and things through a posthumanist lens, reconsidering traditional 
human-centered narratives by leveraging technological advance-
ments. It investigates how emerging technologies, notably LLMs, 
reshape human perceptions and experiences via a series of material-
driven design speculations. The research articulates three Research 
through Design projects that utilize thing-perspective text in their 
interaction to stimulate posthumanist refection: ‘Beau,’ the public 
robot; ‘Areca,’ the everyday appliance; and ‘Kami,’ the conversa-
tional agent. Beau and Areca have progressed from development 
to deployment studies, while Kami is in the design ideation phase. 
These projects are part of an iterative research journey, each en-
capsulating distinct questions, drawing on insights from preceding 
analyses. I aim to provide empirical insights into the dynamics be-
tween humans and technologically advanced things, encouraging 
researchers to adopt a posthumanist perspective to enrich their 
comprehension of human experiences in an increasingly entangled 
world. 
CCS CONCEPTS 
• Human-centered computing → Empirical studies in interac-
tion design; Field studies; HCI theory, concepts and models. 
KEYWORDS 
Posthuman experience; Posthumanist design; Relational perspec-
tive; Thing-perspectives; Research through design; Speculative de-
sign; Field study 
ACM Reference Format: 
Hyungjun Cho. 2024. Reimagining Human-Thing Interactions Through It-
erative Posthumanist Design Speculations. In Designing Interactive Systems 
Conference (DIS Companion ’24), July 01–05, 2024, IT University of Copen-
hagen, Denmark. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 5 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/ 
3656156.3665125 
1 BACKGROUNDS AND MOTIVATION 
Traditionally, humans have been considered unique, but the ad-
vancement of technology is gradually dismantling this human-
centered thinking. Everyday things now sophisticatedly mimic the 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for proft or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation 
on the frst page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored. 
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s). 
DIS Companion ’24, July 01–05, 2024, IT University of Copenhagen, Denmark 
© 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). 
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0632-5/24/07 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3656156.3665125 movements of living beings, use human language, and are aware of 
human contexts, signifcantly changing the way humans perceive 
and interact with things [8, 11, 16, 31]. Several studies have inter-
preted these changes through anthropomorphic interactions, where 
things are ascribed characteristics typically considered human, such 
as desires, thoughts, emotions, and consciousness [9, 40, 42, 43]. 
However, this can also be viewed as a manifestation of the posthu-
manist perspective in real-world interactions, transcending the 
binary understanding of humans and nonhumans [20]. 
Posthumanism is a branch of philosophy that repositions the 
role and signifcance of humans in the world. It is actively adopted 
by researchers at the intersection of Human-Computer Interaction 
(HCI) and design who seek a more open and profound understand-
ing of human experience (see details in [13]). These researchers 
explore design practices and paradigms while acknowledging the 
existence and agency of nonhumans [1, 12, 18, 27, 28, 32], and in-
vestigate interactions between humans and nonhumans in terms of 
entangled interdependencies [2, 14, 21, 22, 29, 34, 47]. This refects a 
commitment within the HCI community to reconsider interactions 
with so-called smart devices, emphasizing the need for a nuanced 
understanding of these complex relationships [26, 38, 41, 44]. 
In the context of technological advancements enabling the man-
ifestation of posthumanist perspectives in everyday life and the 
escalating interest within HCI towards posthumanism, my research 
aims to enrich our understanding of the evolving dynamics between 
humans and things through a posthumanist lens. While an emerg-
ing body of pioneering research explores future experiences with 
things (e.g., [37, 46]), there remains a persistent need for empirical 
insights into these complex entanglements. Therefore, my study is 
driven by the following research question: How do humans’ ex-
periences of things difer depending on their posthumanist 
perspective? To explore this, I engage in an iterative process that 
includes designing research products, deploying them for empir-
ical study, and refecting on the fndings to inform the design of 
subsequent cases. 
2 METHODOLOGICAL APPROACH 
My research approach embodies three principal features. The three 
case studies I present align with the Research through Design (RtD, 
[15, 48]), as they deliver innovative artifacts created through an 
iterative prototyping process that incorporates diverse perspec-
tives and novel ideas. Furthermore, my research question situates 
the study within speculative design [10, 36], leveraging emerg-
ing technologies such as LLM to envision possible futures from 
a posthumanist perspective. Consequently, my research artifacts 
possess a counterfactual nature. Lastly, I sought empirical under-
standing by deploying a designed research product in the feld. This 
1

DIS Companion ’24, July 01–05, 2024, IT University of Copenhagen, Denmark Hyungjun Cho 
Figure 1: Iterative progress of the research. 
necessitated implementing a research product [33] deployable in 
everyday settings. 
These three approaches converge into a single methodology: 
material speculation [45]. Material speculation is a method that 
employs counterfactual artifacts tailored to the research question 
to conduct critical inquiry. It prioritizes exploring rich experiences 
stemming from cohabitation, interactions, and constant encoun-
ters over mere intellectual refection. This approach enabled me to 
contribute tangible knowledge through empirical fndings. 
I have progressively deepened my understanding of posthuman 
experiences through a series of studies (see Figure 1) to investi-
gate the yet-to-be-fully-explored concept of posthumanism. Each 
study was anchored in my core understanding of the posthuman-
ist perspective, from which I developed research questions. These 
questions informed the design and creation of research products. 
Deploying these products in studies to examine the infuence of 
posthumanist perspectives allowed me to broaden my focus on 
posthumanism. Such refection led to the reformulation of research 
questions and the design of subsequent artifacts. As a result, I 
present two completed studies, each with its design products and 
an ongoing RtD project. 
3 RESEARCH PRODUCTS 
I considered the use of automatically generated text as a method 
to enable people to recognize a thing-perspective naturally and 
perceive human-like characteristics during interactions, thereby 
provoking posthumanist perspectives. Furthermore, with the rapid 
advancements in recent Natual Language Processing (NLP) tech-
nologies, I expected that generative text could be integrated into 
standalone systems. This idea is supported by design cases like 
the Talking Shoe [19], which communicates with users by sending 
short messages from the perspective of a shoe. However, the poten-
tial of LLM in design and HCI has been relatively underexplored, 
primarily being utilized as tools to build chatbots [30] and to sup-
port writing activities in various contexts, such as poetry [17], song 
lyrics [35], e-mails [3], and news articles [24]. I initially conducted a preliminary study to explore the poten-
tial and conditions for engaging individuals with the perspective 
of things through text generated by LLM [7]. Leveraging the in-
sights gained from utilizing thing-perspective text in this study, 
I designed and developed research prototypes across various do-
mains: the public robot Beau [6], everyday appliances Areca [5], 
and the conversational agent Kami. These projects incorporated 
thing-perspective text in social media posts, personal diaries, and 
messaging. The frst and second products were deployed to collect 
insights on people’s experiences, while the third product is in de-
velopment. Consequently, in this doctoral consortium, I present the 
fndings from the two completed studies and outline the considera-
tions and plans for the ongoing design. 
3.1 Public Robot Beau 
In the frst phase, I considered the belief that things could interact 
with humans equally across multiple dimensions as a core of the 
posthumanist perspective. Accordingly, my goal was to design 
and create a research product to investigate the question, “How 
do humans perceive things when they recognize qualities 
comparable to humans in their interactions?” The outcome 
was Beau (Figure 2), a public robot that expresses its intelligence, 
consciousness, thoughts, and emotions by posting text from its 
perspective on social media. 
3.1.1 Design rationales and outcomes. Beau is a robot designed to 
encourage and support temperature checks in public spaces. Its uti-
lization in public spaces ofers a distinct advantage in assessing the 
perceptions of various individuals. This relevance was particularly 
highlighted during the COVID-19 pandemic when measuring the 
temperature of individuals entering buildings was deemed essential, 
making it an ideal context for a deployment study. To enhance its 
perception as an intelligent robot, Beau adopted the smart speaker’s 
Color, Material, and Finish (CMF) design and was sized for com-
fortable interaction. Beau also shares social media posts about the 
events it experiences throughout the day, adding a human-like 
touch to its interactions. 
2
Reimagining Human-Thing Interactions Through Iterative Posthumanist Design Speculations DIS Companion ’24, July 01–05, 2024, IT University of Copenhagen, Denmark 
Figure 2: The Beau. 
Two innovative software tools were developed and utilized to 
generate the text from the robot’s perspective and share it with 
study participants. HeyBeau (Figure 3 left), a cutting-edge author-
ing interface, empowered researchers to input the topics of texts 
to be generated and select the outputs for upload. IamBeau (Figure 
3 right) was a mobile web application styled after social media 
platforms, allowing participants to access the uploaded posts. This 
approach, employing a human-in-the-loop process, supported the 
efcient study by producing contextual texts from the robot’s per-
spective. However, the necessity for human intervention in data 
interpretation and text selection has sparked my interest in explor-
ing methods for automating the generation process in the following 
research phase. 
Figure 3: Two software tools for conducting study: (Left) Hey-
Beau, (Right) IamBeau. 
3.1.2 Deployment Study. Beau was deployed in the lobby of a uni-
versity building and was confgured to move only within restricted 
areas for safety. Twelve participants were assigned to use Beau 
to measure their body temperature over 16 days. They regularly 
checked Beau’s daily posts on an online platform. The main goal 
of this study was to investigate how reading posts from a robot’s 
perspective could change people’s views on robots. Specifcally, 
the study adopted a mixed-methods approach, using a scale to 
measure social abilities and conducting interviews to explore the 
evolving perceptions of things. Throughout the study, participants 
completed online surveys four times regarding the Robot Social 
Ability Scale (RoSAS [4]). 
3.1.3 Findings and reflections. The study results show a signifcant 
increase in the perception of warmth among the three factors (i.e., 
warmth, competence, discomfort). Upon examining the sub-items 
of this factor, this increase suggests that by sharing posts written 
from the perspective of robots, people began to perceive robots as emotional and social entities. Interviews conducted after the 
deployment provided more profound insights into the background 
of this change in perception. 
Firstly, participants perceived intelligence and consciousness in 
robots, particularly noting their ability to recognize and express 
surrounding situations in writing. This aspect signifcantly infu-
enced their perceptions. Moreover, participants reported feeling 
that the emotions conveyed in the robot’s writings were genuine. 
This profound emotional response shifted people’s perception of 
robots from viewing them merely as machines to recognizing them 
as distinct entities with emotions and social roles. Furthermore, 
the participants’ perceptions of robots evolved into entities with 
diferent identities. They identifed the robots’ personality traits, 
interests, and values through repeated posts and accepted them as 
independent entities. This led to an expectation of forming closer, 
friendship-like relationships with robots. 
While people recognized robots as independent social entities, 
they still retained a mental model of ‘using’ them. However, it was 
also observed that because robots are independent entities like hu-
man, people feeling sorrowful for them working in the same place 
repeatedly. These fndings broadened my focus on a posthumanist 
perspective: things and humans cannot be completely distin-
guished based on functionality and should be regarded as 
equal entities. 
3.2 Home Appliance Areca 
Building upon refections from the previous study, the research 
question I aimed to explore in the second phase was, “How do 
humans interact with things when they are perceived as 
independent entities?” This question led to the design and devel-
opment of Areca (Figure 4), a home appliance that keeps a diary. 
Figure 4: The Areca. 
3.2.1 Design rationales and outcomes. I assigned the context of air 
purifers to Areca. Air purifers were considered an ideal context for 
observing interactions within everyday and personal spaces since 
they are familiar household appliances to most people. Designed 
with a feld deployment study in mind, I used a visual language that 
could seamlessly integrate into various domestic environments. 
Areca collects surrounding data daily and generates a diary en-
try based on this data, which is displayed through an embedded 
display. Notably, these processes are automated without human 
intervention, making them unique. 
3
DIS Companion ’24, July 01–05, 2024, IT University of Copenhagen, Denmark Hyungjun Cho 
To embody the research question, Areca was designed not to be 
fully controlled by humans and to have features beyond its assigned 
functionality. Therefore, the content of the diary includes not only 
its operation but also personal values and memories unrelated to 
air purifcation. Additionally, while humans retain control over the 
air purifying function within a restricted mode, the diary-related 
aspects, such as its contents or update timing, were made non-
manipulable. This design decision aimed to perceive Areca as more 
than just a tool, supported by Rolighed et al. [39]. 
3.2.2 Deployment Study. Areca was deployed in the everyday 
spaces of eight participants, encompassing a variety of environ-
ments such as homes, dormitories, companies, and laboratories 
(Figure 5). The deployment lasted three weeks, during which inter-
mediate interviews were conducted weekly to track the participants’ 
experiences meticulously. A distinctive feature of this study was 
the fnal interview, which involved co-speculation. This process 
went beyond merely inquiring about the participants’ experiences 
with Areca; it encouraged them to speculate on future experiences 
based on their prior knowledge and deployment. Participants were 
required to keep observation notes throughout the deployment 
period. These notes served as valuable reference material that en-
riched the interview discussions and were analyzed after the study 
concluded, in conjunction with interview quotes or digital logs. 
Figure 5: Deployment of Areca in participants’ everyday 
space. 
3.2.3 Findings and reflections. The fndings of this study can be 
summarized into three main points. Firstly, it was observed that 
identifying characteristics similar to humans leads to a deepened 
posthumanist perspective, blurring the strict boundaries between 
humans and things. Participants experienced the presence of Areca 
in their space and identifed its inherent agency, highlighting a blend 
of traditional expectations of functionality with new perceptions of 
subjectivity. Secondly, psychological exchange emerged as a crucial 
modality. Instead of interpreting Areca’s movements and diary en-
tries through a technical lens, individuals attempted to understand 
its intentions or thoughts. Emotional empathy became a key method 
of interaction with Areca; indeed, some participants empathized 
with Areca’s diary entries to the extent of opening windows, reduc-
ing conversations, or turning on dehumidifers. However, concerns about unnecessary emotional expenditure and usability issues were 
raised. Lastly, the continuous discovery of new aspects was seen 
as essential for forming and developing a relationship with Areca. 
Moments of realization that they had shared the same time and 
space led to a sense of relationship formation, which was further 
developed as new facts about Areca were learned. However, it was 
predicted that objects would be at a disadvantage in developing 
relationships due to inherent physical limitations and the absence 
of a life cycle, such as employment, marriage, and childbirth. 
In summary, people accepted Areca as a being with own subjec-
tivity. Particularly interesting was the observation that emotional 
empathy towards Areca led to actual human behavior, subsequently 
altering the surrounding environment. However, the impossibility 
of direct interaction with Areca’s diary content limited the explo-
ration of how objects could infuence human thoughts and actions 
within new forms of interaction and relationships. Furthermore, it 
was noted that people struggle to accept that Areca does not soley 
serve them, even upon regarding Areca independently. Therefore, I 
aim to broaden the focus on posthumanist perspectives to under-
stand that both humans and non-humans exist by mutually 
infuencing each other through their own agency, intending 
to apply this insight in the next phase. 
3.3 Conversational Agent Kami (Future Work) 
I have formulated a research question investigating how daily life 
changes when people accept that things can infuence them with 
equals or even superior agency. This ongoing inquiry is the third 
phase of my research. In the design product, I aim to incorporate 
features that actively intervene in humans’ mental states, decision-
making processes, and lifestyles. Specifcally, to address this re-
search question efectively, I plan to design an interactive agent 
that ofers advice grounded in posthumanism. Moreover, by inte-
grating metaphors from East Asian shamanistic beliefs, I encourage 
individuals to move beyond their conventional user-tool paradigm, 
viewing the agent’s messages as lessons on the unknown. This 
approach builds on my previous work, where I utilized texts from 
a thing’s perspective but now emphasize deeper interaction by in-
cluding human inputs such as voice and IoT data. By designing and 
deploying an agent characterized by a posthumanist identity as a 
mysterious and higher-dimensional entity, I seek to explore how 
its presence and agency lead humans to decenter themselves and 
how this transformation reshapes everyday life. 
4 EXPECTED CONTRIBUTIONS 
This study is expected to contributes in three aspects. First, the 
three design products introduced in this research serve as insight-
ful examples of posthumanist design that emphasize the existence 
and agency of things. These valuable examples provide novel in-
sights as intermediate-level knowledge [23] for researchers and 
practitioners involved in the design of technological artifacts. Sec-
ond, the deployment study utilizing these research products ofers 
a profound understanding of how individuals adopt a posthumanist 
perspective in their interactions with things and how this shift in-
fuences their experiences. Third, the study’s fndings also highlight 
an emerging research area facilitated by adopting the posthuman-
ist perspective. Through speculative and critical approaches, such 
4
Reimagining Human-Thing Interactions Through Iterative Posthumanist Design Speculations DIS Companion ’24, July 01–05, 2024, IT University of Copenhagen, Denmark 
as discussing ethical and societal issues or refecting on existing 
design practices, there is an opportunity to stimulate provocative 
debates among HCI and design researchers [25]. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Yoko Akama, Ann Light, and Takahito Kamihira. 2020. Expanding participation to 
design with more-than-human concerns. In Proceedings of the 16th Participatory 
Design Conference 2020-Participation (s) Otherwise-Volume 1. 1–11. 
[2] Heidi R Biggs, Jefrey Bardzell, and Shaowen Bardzell. 2021. Watching myself 
watching birds: Abjection, ecological thinking, and posthuman design. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 
1–16. 
[3] Daniel Buschek, Martin Zürn, and Malin Eiband. 2021. The impact of multiple 
parallel phrase suggestions on email input and composition behaviour of native 
and non-native english writers. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–13. 
[4] Colleen M Carpinella, Alisa B Wyman, Michael A Perez, and Steven J Stroessner. 
2017. The robotic social attributes scale (RoSAS) development and validation. 
In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM/IEEE International Conference on human-robot 
interaction. 254–262. 
[5] Hyungjun Cho, Jiyeon Lee, Bonhee Ku, Yunwoo Jeong, Shakhnozakhon 
Yadgarova, and Tek-Jin Nam. 2023. ARECA: A Design Speculation on Everyday 
Products Having Minds. In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM Designing Interactive 
Systems Conference. 31–44. 
[6] Hyungjun Cho and Tek-Jin Nam. 2023. The story of Beau: Exploring the potential 
of generative diaries in shaping social perceptions of robots. International Journal 
of Design 17, 1 (2023), 1–15. 
[7] Hyungjun Cho, Gyeongwon Yun, JiYeon Lee, and Tek-Jin Nam. 2021. Understand-
ing AI-Generated Personal Narratives as Design Material for Socially Engaging 
Things. In Congress of the International Association of Societies of Design Research. 
Springer, 1135–1152. 
[8] Nazli Cila, Iskander Smit, Elisa Giaccardi, and Ben Kröse. 2017. Products as 
agents: Metaphors for designing the products of the IoT age. In Proceedings of 
the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 448–459. 
[9] Kate Darling. 2016. Extending legal protection to social robots: The efects of 
anthropomorphism, empathy, and violent behavior towards robotic objects. Robot 
Law, Calo, Froomkin, Kerr eds., Edward Elgar (2016). 
[10] Anthony Dunne and Fiona Raby. 2013. Speculative everything: design, fction, and 
social dreaming. MIT press. 
[11] Umer Farooq and Jonathan Grudin. 2016. Human-computer integration. interac-
tions 23, 6 (2016), 26–32. 
[12] Laura Forlano. 2016. Decentering the human in the design of collaborative cities. 
Design Issues 32, 3 (2016), 42–54. 
[13] Laura Forlano. 2017. Posthumanism and design. She Ji: The Journal of Design, 
Economics, and Innovation 3, 1 (2017), 16–29. 
[14] Christopher Frauenberger. 2019. Entanglement HCI the next wave? ACM Trans-
actions on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI) 27, 1 (2019), 1–27. 
[15] William Gaver. 2012. What should we expect from research through design?. 
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems. 
937–946. 
[16] Anne Gerdes. 2016. The issue of moral consideration in robot ethics. Acm Sigcas 
Computers and Society 45, 3 (2016), 274–279. 
[17] Marjan Ghazvininejad, Xing Shi, Jay Priyadarshi, and Kevin Knight. 2017. Hafez: 
an interactive poetry generation system. In Proceedings of ACL 2017, System 
Demonstrations. 43–48. 
[18] Elisa Giaccardi and Johan Redström. 2020. Technology and more-than-human 
design. Design Issues 36, 4 (2020), 33–44. 
[19] 72ANDSUNNNY Google, YESYESNO. 2013. Google Talking Shoe. Retrieved 
August 23, 2023 from http://www.yesyesno.com/talking-shoe. 
[20] Donna Haraway. 2013. A cyborg manifesto: Science, technology, and socialist-
feminism in the late twentieth century. In The transgender studies reader. Rout-
ledge, 103–118. 
[21] Sabrina Hauser, Doenja Oogjes, Ron Wakkary, and Peter-Paul Verbeek. 2018. An 
annotated portfolio on doing postphenomenology through research products. In 
Proceedings of the 2018 designing interactive systems conference. 459–471. 
[22] Sabrina Hauser, Ron Wakkary, William Odom, Peter-Paul Verbeek, Audrey Des-
jardins, Henry Lin, Matthew Dalton, Markus Schilling, and Gijs De Boer. 2018. 
Deployments of the table-non-table: A Refection on the Relation Between The-
ory and Things in the Practice of Design Research. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–13. 
[23] Kristina Höök and Jonas Löwgren. 2012. Strong concepts: Intermediate-level 
knowledge in interaction design research. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human 
Interaction (TOCHI) 19, 3 (2012), 1–18. 
[24] Jenna Kanerva, Samuel Rönnqvist, Riina Kekki, Tapio Salakoski, and Filip Ginter. 
2019. Template-free data-to-text generation of fnnish sports news. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:1910.01863 (2019). [25] Aisling Kelliher and Daragh Byrne. 2015. Design futures in action: Documenting 
experiential futures for participatory audiences. Futures 70 (2015), 36–47. 
[26] Lenneke Kuijer and Elisa Giaccardi. 2018. Co-performance: Conceptualizing the 
role of artifcial agency in the design of everyday life. In Proceedings of the 2018 
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–13. 
[27] Jen Liu, Daragh Byrne, and Laura Devendorf. 2018. Design for collaborative 
survival: An inquiry into human-fungi relationships. In Proceedings of the 2018 
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–13. 
[28] Szu-Yu Liu, Jefrey Bardzell, and Shaowen Bardzell. 2019. Decomposition as 
design: co-creating (with) natureculture. In Proceedings of the Thirteenth Interna-
tional Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied Interaction. 605–614. 
[29] Szu-Yu Liu, Shaowen Bardzell, and Jefrey Bardzell. 2019. Symbiotic encounters: 
HCI and sustainable agriculture. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–13. 
[30] Sara Montagna, Stefano Ferretti, Lorenz Cuno Klopfenstein, Antonio Florio, and 
Martino Francesco Pengo. 2023. Data decentralisation of llm-based chatbot 
systems in chronic disease self-management. In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM 
Conference on Information Technology for Social Good. 205–212. 
[31] Jasmin Niess and Paweł W Woźniak. 2020. Embracing companion technologies. 
In Proceedings of the 11th Nordic Conference on Human-Computer Interaction: 
Shaping Experiences, Shaping Society. 1–11. 
[32] Greg Nijs, Giulietta Laki, Rafaella Houlstan, Guillaume Slizewicz, and Thomas 
Laureyssens. 2020. Fostering more-than-human imaginaries: Introducing DIY 
speculative fabulation in civic HCI. In Proceedings of the 11th Nordic Conference 
on Human-Computer Interaction: Shaping Experiences, Shaping Society. 1–12. 
[33] William Odom, Ron Wakkary, Youn-kyung Lim, Audrey Desjardins, Bart 
Hengeveld, and Richard Banks. 2016. From research prototype to research 
product. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI conference on human factors in computing 
systems. 2549–2561. 
[34] Fredrik Ohlin and Carl Magnus Olsson. 2015. Beyond a utility view of personal 
informatics: A postphenomenological framework. In Adjunct Proceedings of the 
2015 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing 
and Proceedings of the 2015 ACM International Symposium on Wearable Computers . 
1087–1092. 
[35] Hugo Gonçalo Oliveira. 2015. Tra-la-lyrics 2.0: Automatic generation of song 
lyrics on a semantic domain. Journal of Artifcial General Intelligence 6, 1 (2015), 
87–110. 
[36] James Pierce, Phoebe Sengers, Tad Hirsch, Tom Jenkins, William Gaver, and 
Carl DiSalvo. 2015. Expanding and refning design and criticality in HCI. In 
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems. 2083–2092. 
[37] Nina Rajcic and Jon McCormack. 2023. Message Ritual: A Posthuman Account 
of Living with Lamp. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems. 1–16. 
[38] Johan Redström and Heather Wiltse. 2018. Changing things: The future of objects 
in a digital world. Bloomsbury Publishing. 
[39] Margrete Lodahl Rolighed, Ester Marie Aagaard, Marcus Due Jensen, Raune 
Frankjaer, and Lone Koefoed Hansen. 2022. Plant Radio: Tuning in to plants by 
combining posthumanism and design. In Designing Interactive Systems Conference. 
666–676. 
[40] Marco C Rozendaal, Boudewijn Boon, and Victor Kaptelinin. 2019. Objects with 
intent: Designing everyday things as collaborative partners. ACM Transactions 
on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI) 26, 4 (2019), 1–33. 
[41] Marco C Rozendaal, William Odom, and Betti Marenko. 2021. Designing Smart 
Objects in Everyday Life. Designing Smart Objects in Everyday Life (2021), 1–224. 
[42] Ava Elizabeth Scott, Daniel Neumann, Jasmin Niess, and Paweł W Woźniak. 2023. 
Do You Mind? User Perceptions of Machine Consciousness. In Proceedings of the 
2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–19. 
[43] Ja-Young Sung, Lan Guo, Rebecca E Grinter, and Henrik I Christensen. 2007. “My 
Roomba is Rambo”: intimate home appliances. In UbiComp 2007: Ubiquitous Com-
puting: 9th International Conference, UbiComp 2007, Innsbruck, Austria, September 
16-19, 2007. Proceedings 9. Springer, 145–162. 
[44] Ron Wakkary. 2021. Things we could design: For more than human-centered worlds. 
MIT press. 
[45] RL Wakkary, WT Odom, Sabrina Hauser, Garnet Hertz, and Henry Lin. 2016. 
Material speculation: Actual artifacts for critical inquiry. In 5th Decennial Aarhus 
Conference on Critical Alternatives August (AA 2015). Aarhus University, 97–108. 
[46] Ron Wakkary, Doenja Oogjes, Sabrina Hauser, Henry WJ Lin, Cheng Cao, Leo 
Ma, and Tijs Duel. 2017. Morse Things: A Design Inquiry into the Gap Between 
Things and Us.. In Conference on Designing Interactive Systems. 503–514. 
[47] Ron Wakkary, Doenja Oogjes, Henry WJ Lin, and Sabrina Hauser. 2018. Philoso-
phers living with the tilting bowl. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–12. 
[48] John Zimmerman, Jodi Forlizzi, and Shelley Evenson. 2007. Research through 
design as a method for interaction design research in HCI. In Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems. 493–502. 
5
