Governance Design of Collaborative Intelligence for Public Policy
and Services
Yu-Che Chen
School of Public Administration,
University of Nebraska at Omaha
ychen@unomaha.eduHelen K. Liu
Department of Political Science,
National Taiwan University
helenliu4@ntu.edu.twYi-Fan Wang
Department of Political Science,
National Taiwan University
molinawang@gmail.com
ABSTRACT
The existing literature presents an opportunity to address the gov-
ernance challenge of collaborative intelligence for public policy
and services. This paper seizes the opportunity by developing a
governance framework for public value creation. This proposed
framework builds on a novel conceptualization of collaborative
intelligence that advances collaboration as the governance goal
and treats technology-enabled platforms as central to collaboration.
This framework draws from the scholarly foundation of collabo-
rative governance that focuses on rules and addresses levels and
dynamics. Moreover, this framework integrates both technologi-
cal and administrative dimensions. The important advancements
of this proposed framework lie both in treating AI as an actor
in governance structures and processes and in understanding the
interactions between technologies and rules. Another important
contribution is to integrate various mechanisms of collaborative
public service production into this unified governance framework
for collaborative intelligence.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Social and professional topics ; •Computing / technology
policy; •Government technologypolicy ;
KEYWORDS
Collaborative intelligence, governance, digital government, collab-
oration
ACM Reference Format:
Yu-Che Chen, Helen K. Liu, and Yi-Fan Wang. 2024. Governance Design of
Collaborative Intelligence for Public Policy and Services. In 25th Annual
InternationalConferenceonDigitalGovernmentResearch(DGO2024),June
11–14, 2024, Taipei, Taiwan. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 10 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3657054.3657075
1 INTRODUCTION
The rise of artificial intelligence presents significant governance
challengestoorganizationsforadvancingpublicpolicyandservices.
These include governance design to address the challenge of in-
volving artificial intelligence in making decisions that significantly
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish,topostonserversortoredistributetolists,requirespriorspecificpermission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
DGO 2024, June 11–14, 2024, Taipei, Taiwan
© 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0988-3/24/06
https://doi.org/10.1145/3657054.3657075impact the rights and welfare of members of society [ 10,32,45,69].
Another salient challenge is to identify and implement governance
principles and design structures and processes for addressing bias
that can be introduced at various stages of the development and
design of AI systems [12].
At the same time, opportunities exist for addressing these gover-
nance challenges regarding the integration of artificial intelligence
in public services. The existing literature on the theory and prac-
tice of AI governance provides several avenues to address these
challenges. The first is to approach governance from multiple and
embedded levels of policy and legal frameworks [ 66]. The second
is to take a cross-sector or collaborative approach to accountability
and public value creation [ 37,59]. Third is a process-orientation
for understanding and assessing the interaction between artificial
intelligence and public values [ 12]. Fourth is to build the micro
foundation of the unique strengths and complementary collabora-
tion between artificial intelligence and humans in the context of
public organizations [8, 67].
Multiple conceptualizations exist for understanding human-AI
collaboration. Hybrid intelligence brings humans and AI together
by leveraging the complementary strengths of humans and AI [ 17].
Collectiveintelligenceutilizesacollaborativeorganization-directed
platform for people working together to achieve a common organi-
zational goal [ 56]. Although these streams of studies and the diver-
sity of conceptualizations offer significant insights independently,
there is a missed opportunity to build a collaborative governance
framework that integrates these insights for public value creation.
This paper seizes the opportunity by offering a novel conceptual-
ization that advances collaboration for public value creation as the
governancegoalandtreatstechnology-enabledplatformsascentral
to collaboration.
This paper proposes the term ”collaborative intelligence” as a
moreinclusiveandintegrativeconceptualizationthatregardscollab-
orationbothasthegoalandastheprocess, recognizesadiversityof
actors (humans and machines), and covers a collection of collabora-
tive mechanisms (e.g. platform and crowd-sourcing). The proposed
framework builds on public governance and institutional design
literature as the unifying intellectual foundation for the purpose of
governance design for public services. Moreover, this framework
explicitlyaddressesgovernanceactivitiesforcollaborationbetween
humans and AI across levels.
This paper achieves its goal of developing a governance frame-
work by first introducing the conceptualization of collaborative
intelligenceassituatedintheexistingbodiesofliterature. Itfollows
with the challenges facing the use and integration of AI in public
service decision-making in the continuum and variety of human-AI
collaboration. Next is the articulation of the proposed governance
framework to address the governance challenges grounded in the
146

DGO 2024, June 11–14, 2024, Taipei, Taiwan Yu-CheChen et al.
literature on collaborative public governance and institutional de-
sign. This paper concludes with future research opportunities.
2 COLLABORATIVE INTELLIGENCE FOR
PUBLIC POLICY AND SERVICES
This paper aims to develop a conceptualization of collaborative in-
telligence that promotes an effective design of collaboration across
multiple intelligent actors for public value creation. It draws from
the insights of AI governance, collective intelligence, collaborative
governance,andactornetworktheory. Theproposedconceptualiza-
tion first recognizes multiple intelligences and treats both humans
and AI as intelligent actors. A unifying conceptualization of hu-
man and artificial intelligences concerns intelligent capabilities,
including sensing, learning, reasoning, communicating, and taking
actions [ 61]. Another quality is to carry out these capabilities with
foresight [ 49,61]. Both humans and AI are intelligent actors as
supported by the Actor Network Theory [ 28] which treats both
human and machines as actors in a network to decide on and im-
plement tasks. The notion of actors recognizes the ability of both
humans and AI to make decisions and should be treated as actors of
decisions. For instance, AI is responsible for information analysis
to identify potential fraudulent activities, while humans draw from
theirfieldexperiencesindecidingonwhotopursue[ 19]. Moreover,
this paper further extends the conceptualization to organizations
such as a governmental agency as an organizational actor and a
network of computers as a collective actor.
These intelligent actors have respective strengths and weak-
nesses in the context of public services and governance for public
value creation. Bullock et al. [ 9] use complexity and uncertainty
as the two dimensions to define task characteristics for comparing
the strengths of humans and machines. Complexity refers to the
level at which a task deviates from the standard procedure, and
uncertainty means the degree to which the task cannot be pre-
dicted and analyzed. Humans are more competent to tackle com-
plex tasks than machines, but AI agents process uncertainty better
than public employees. In other words, human agents dominate
in highly complex and uncertain tasks, but machine intelligence
outperforms in simple and straightforward work. In addition, AI
leads the collaboration in public services with high uncertainty and
low complexity, while human agents can maintain more power in
completing missions with low uncertainty and high complexity [ 9].
Humans are good at tackling tasks that require more discretion
[15]. Moreover, human agents can develop strategies to improve
socially- and service-oriented values in collaborating with AI even
if their traditional discretion has been replaced by machines [6].
The proposed conceptualization of collaborative intelligence re-
gards collaboration as both the goal and the process. The goal of
collaboration is to achieve a result that is better than the work of a
single type of actors, either humans or AI. Moreover, collaborative
intelligence is about the collaborative mechanisms that make col-
laboration productive. For public service and governance, there has
been a growth in the variety and sophistication of digital platforms
to engage citizens to participate in public policy and engage in
public service production [34, 40].Similarly,therehasbeengrowthinpolicy,organizational,andin-
stitutional arrangements to foster human-AI collaboration for pub-
licpolicyandservice[ 19,37]. Morebroadly,thecoproductionindig-
ital transformation in the public sector includes co-planning (stake-
holder participation for national digital transformation strategies),
codesign(userstories,prototypes,andworkshops),co-management
(public-private partnership, contracting out), co-delivery (data en-
try, provision of services), and co-assessment (forums for evalua-
tion) [53].
This paper extends the public governance literature in public
administration to explicitly address the role of digital technologies
and platforms in collaboration between human intelligence and
artificial intelligence. The studies of digital transformation [ 20,53]
inform the governance design. Digital transformation requires
consideration of cultural, organizational, structural, and relational
aspects of changes in the public sector [ 20,35]. Moreover, copro-
duction in digital transformation creates economic, administrative,
citizen, and democratic values [53].
The research on collaborative digital platforms further intro-
duces integrated governance and technology design. Governments
leverage the functions of digital platforms for public services [ 27].
Digital government platforms are increasingly recognized as criti-
cal public governance and service components. Noveck [ 40] argues
that decisions made by public institutions would be more legiti-
mate and effective if the decision-making process involved internal
and external expertise through advanced technologies, known as
crowd-sourcing. To enhance the governance of digital and plat-
form government, Noveck [ 40] proposes a further understanding
of who participates, what type of incentives and motivations the
participantshave, andwhat institutions aredesigned as the guiding
principles of digital platform governance.
Furthermore, Liu [ 30] reveals three components of digital and
platform government governance: alignment, motivation, and eval-
uation. On alignment, Liu [ 30] stresses the importance of aligning
policy goals with crowd-sourcing initiatives and matching crowd-
sourcing tasks with participants’ skills. On motivation, it is critical
to create incentives for participation and quality of contribution
[30]. Finally, on evaluation, it is important to design a peer review
process and establish a reputation system to build trust for the
governance of the digital and platform government.
3 BENEFITS AND CHALLENGES OF
COLLABORATIVE INTELLIGENCE FOR
PUBLIC POLICY AND SERVICES
The opportunities for collaborative intelligence come from the com-
plementary role that human and AI actors play by leveraging their
respective strengths to compensate for their respective weaknesses.
Humans’ strengths lie in understanding complexity and dealing
with uncertainty [ 9]. However, humans are limited in gathering
and processing a large amount of data and information with accu-
racy. On the other hand, AI is superior in gathering and analyzing
big data with precision. Nonetheless, AI is constrained by the data
and its ability to solve complex and uncertain problems. Working
together, humans and AI can produce significant results [17, 26].
The collaboration of humans and AI has seen positive impacts in
several public service areas [ 64]. In governmental operations, there
147
Governance Design of Collaborative Intelligence for Public Policy and Services DGO 2024, June 11–14, 2024, Taipei, Taiwan
is an increase in the capabilities of gathering and analyzing a large
amount of data for fraud detection, resource planning, customer
services, work productivity, etc [ 19]. The most recent development
and application of ChatGPT can provide digital knowledge and
writing assistance that is comprehensive and personalized.
The benefits of collaborative intelligence also come from
platform-based coproduction and co-creation between citizens and
governments. Noveck [ 41] first notes that new technology facili-
tates collaboration and enables collective action to resolve complex
problems. She emphasizes the importance of designing a trans-
parent process to exchange information between the government
and the public through the rise of social media. Most importantly,
policy experts selected by government officials might not be knowl-
edgeable about all aspects of the policy needs. Therefore, new
technology allowing crowd-sourcing and open peer review can
help the government be more informed about policy decisions [ 41].
Citizen service information systems such as 311 can also benefit
from collaborative intelligence [ 50]. By reporting issues, citizens
help local governments sense the problems experienced by citizens
on the ground. By asking for information, citizens assist govern-
mentsinidentifyingthemostcriticalinformationservices. Indoing
so, citizens play the dual roles of customers and partners [ 58]. AI
can be deployed for its natural language processing capability to
provide on-demand targeted responses to inquiries. Moreover, pub-
lic innovation can be enhanced through better digital and platform
government governance by engaging different social and political
actors in collaborative processes addressing differences [ 60]. The
processes of constructive managing differences are critical for pub-
lic innovation because they help identify problems and simulate
solutions to facilitate innovation.
However, there are risks and dangers in the rise of algorithmic
governance with the deployment of AI for public governance and
services. Some government use of AI, internally created by the
collaboration between AI and government employees, can threaten
personal autonomy by nudging citizens to behave in the way that
enhances government control [ 38]. Information asymmetry can
further erode the ability of regular citizens to respond or challenge
algorithmic or AI-based decisions [10, 45].
Moreover, the use of AI in public governance can increase the
risk of administrative evil [ 68]. Such risks arise from technology
instructability, automation bias, and domination of technological
rationality. The risks further increase when there is a lack of con-
sideration of social and democratic values, insufficient testing of AI-
enabledsolutions,andanoverrelianceonquantitativeandmachine-
readable data.
The use of AI can result in discrimination against certain social
groups [ 65]. Digital inequality has been a long-standing challenge
since the advancement and use of digital technologies by govern-
ment [21,45]. The deployment of artificial intelligence, in some
instances, has further resulted in discrimination in the areas of
policing and hiring practices.4 A GOVERNANCE FRAMEWORK OF
COLLABORATIVE INTELLIGENCE FOR
PUBLIC POLICY AND SERVICES
This proposed framework takes a sociotechnical system perspec-
tive with an explicit focus on digital technologies and intelligent
characteristics for collaboration. The goal is governance design in-
formed primarily by the collaborative governance framework [ 18]
and the studies of institutional analysis and development [ 42,52].
Thecontextispublicgovernanceandservicesthatspanfromcitizen
participation in public policy to government provision of services.
This framework, as depicted in Figure 1, has the following com-
ponents. First are the design principles for the governance of col-
laborative intelligence. Design principles are essential for effective
governance. Moreover, it will discuss mechanisms for integration.
The second component is the consideration of levels. Levels are an
important consideration for understanding the effectiveness of net-
work governance [ 47,48]. Such networks can include both human
actors and AI ones. The distinction between levels is important
[25] and can serve as an analytical frame to identify and leverage
governance design opportunities. The third component is the con-
ceptualization and development of governance as a configuration
of rules for behaviors and interactions. A rule-based analytical
approach can provide more specific governance recommendations
as advanced by scholars working on institutional analysis and de-
velopment[ 51]and institutional grammar [ 22]for the development
of collaborative intelligence.
Moreover, this framework addresses the interactions of these
components by describing the governing mechanisms in the so-
ciotechnicalsystemforachievingthepublicgovernanceandservice
results of collaborative intelligence. These interactions integrate
levelsandrulesbyengagingactionssuchasprincipledengagement,
shared motivation, and capacity for joint action [ 18]. Moreover, the
incorporation of the sociotechnical system perspective addresses
the dynamics of these areas of activities. The feedback loops from
governance results to governance design and activities are essential
considerations for the framework [23, 57].
4.1 Design Principles
The first principle is to use public values to guide the governance
framework. This principle aligns with the context of public gover-
nance and services and addresses the need to serve public interests.
Advancing public interests requires articulation and inclusion of
public values. These values for digital governance can include
societal values such as equity, justice, fairness, and impartiality;
service-oriented ones such as efficiency, effectiveness, and trans-
parency; and duty-oriented ones such as democratic governance
and accountability [ 4]. Moreover, the guidance of public values
also implies the understanding of the interactions between public
values and governing activities. A productive way to understand
such interactions is to examine the process of the collaboration
between humans and AI to study how public values are first intro-
duced for the AI system design, then codified into the goals of AI
systems, followed by the actual implementation of AI systems, and
concluded with an evaluation of the public value implications for
various stakeholders [12].
148
DGO 2024, June 11–14, 2024, Taipei, Taiwan Yu-CheChen et al.
Figure 1: A multi-levelprinciple-guided governanceframeworkfor public policy and services
The second design principle is to explicitly model and design a
sociotechnical system by recognizing both the distinctive charac-
teristics of a social system and a technical one and the interactions
between both systems to form a holistic sociotechnical system. The
social one mainly involves the social interactions between humans
to coordinate among themselves to create shared understanding
and accomplish collective tasks. The technical one consists of the
use of data and various technologies. The primary focus is the digi-
tal format of these data and technologies. The holistic attribute of
the sociotechnical system comes from the networked interactions
andcouplingsofhumansandcomputers. Forinstance,adistributed
computing environment requires the integration of computer net-
works and human networks [ 54]. Moreover, a sociotechnical sys-
tem is a dynamic one that includes feedback loops between various
inputs, conditions, and outputs. A feedback loop can reinforce a
condition or balance it in a complex web of many feedback loops.
Identifying key dynamics and feedback loops helps evaluate and
identify policy solutions [ 23]. The proposed framework will follow
a similar approach to identifying governance solutions.
The third principle is to design collaborative structures and pro-
cesses to leverage the characteristics and strengths of different ac-
tors and focus on their complementarity. Humans are social beings
with emotional attributes. Governance of collaborative intelligence
can design rules and processes to enhance social connections and
attend to emotional motivators. Humans are also the primary ac-
tors who embody public values. Humans can design collaborative
rules to ensure the consideration and infusion of public values into
collaboration. Collaborative processes can explicitly draw on the
strengthsofAIsystemsininformationprocessingandanalysis. The
recent development in the natural language processing capabilityof generative AI provides additional communication capabilities
between humans and information systems.
4.2 Levels
The proposed governance framework explicitly addresses levels.
The distinction between levels is important for the study of public
policy and governance [ 25,39] and for digital platforms [ 34]. The
proposed framework follows the categorization of levels by Jilke et
al. [25] to include macro, meso, and micro levels. The focus at each
level is the policies and rules that govern the behaviors of various
entities. The goal is to conduct institutional design [42, 43].
At the macro level, the digital governance of collaborative intel-
ligence pertains to the broad policy and institutional environment
as well as the technological one. This is usually at the level of
a nation or a union of nations that has its own legal and policy
framework on the collaboration between AI and humans as well as
on citizen-government collaboration utilizing digital platforms. In
the United States, examples of such a framework are the Executive
Order of the Biden Administration titled ”Executive Order on the
Safe, Secure and Trustworthy Development and Use of Artificial
Intelligence” on the specific requirements for federal agencies and
the general statements in the AI Bill of Rights. The technological
environment also shapes the strengths of AI in relation to humans
as well as the ways in which AI and humans can collaborate. The
fast development of generative AI, such as ChatGPT demonstrates
the capability of generative AI in leveraging all publicly available
digital content and the ability to communicate in human-like prose
writing.
At the meso level, governance designs are about the rules for
digital platforms that foster collaboration between an organiza-
tion and individuals or a collaborative network of organizations
149
Governance Design of Collaborative Intelligence for Public Policy and Services DGO 2024, June 11–14, 2024, Taipei, Taiwan
and technical entities for public service. Digital platforms can
foster collaboration between government agencies and individual
citizens/residents to produce public services [ 29]. There are gov-
ernance arrangements that foster collaboration between citizens
and government by utilizing digital platforms. For example, Peer
to Patent case taps into the public service motivation of citizens for
public service production [ 29,41] facilitated by digital platforms.
Another type of coproduction of public service is the resident infor-
mationservicesasgatheredanddisseminatedby311systems. These
platforms can also help with the generation of policy ideas, such as
those seen in the UK’s My2050. These governance arrangements
address the collective action of individuals in the coproduction of
public policy and service.
The technological advancements at the meso level are the devel-
opment of applications and information systems that significantly
increase the ease of collaboration across a diversity of skills and
conditions for the production of public service and the generation
of public policy ideas. Moreover, the aggregation and sharing of
information have been significantly streamlined. For instance, such
streamlining is evident in sophisticated citizen service systems run
by local governments. In addition, the development of AI chatbots
combinedmuchimprovednaturallanguageprocessingcapabilityto
understand and respond to human service queries. For producing
publicly funded computing resources, the advancement in tech-
nology allows the integration of software and hardware as well as
humansforprovidingadvancedcomputingresourcestoresearchers
[13].
At the micro level, it is the design of collaborative interactions
between individuals and a specific AI system. This involves the
specification of the role that humans play in collaborating with AI
systems. Such collaboration should take advantage of the respec-
tive strengths and capabilities of human and AI actors. Building
on the automation literature, the involvement of humans can vary
depending on the stages [ 44]. Moreover, the question of author-
ity and corresponding accountability is important in structuring
collaboration. An AI system for fraudulent activity investigation
is particularly productive in analyzing a large amount of textual
data. At the same time, humans can provide a ”bag of words” based
on their investigatory experiences that flag potentially fraudulent
activities [ 19]. What the AI system offers is recommendations.
The final decision authority still lies in the human investigators,
recognizing the accompanying accountability.
4.3 Rules as Governance Structure
This proposed design framework adapts pertinent rules of institu-
tional design [ 42,43,51] to model the governance structure of a
socio-technical system for collaborative intelligence. First, partici-
pant rules prescribe who can participate in various positions and
decisions. For an AI-enabled system for public information service,
a participant rule can require someone to be a registered local resi-
dent or citizen to contribute to the system. Second, position rules
specify the positions that participants can take in the governance
structure. Atthemesolevel,onepositioncanbepolicymakers,who
decide whether to adopt a certain AI system for a particular digital
government platform to be used. At the micro level is the position
of the AI system developer. Such a position provides the systemdeveloper with an official role in participating in the governance
decisions.
The third type is authority rules, which prescribe a set of de-
cisions attached to a position. For instance, a software developer
typicallyhastheauthoritytomaketechnicaldecisionsonthechoice
of the AI development environment. Public service professionals
have the authority to make decisions on whether to follow the
recommendations of an AI system. The policymakers can decide
on what the core public values are advanced. The question of au-
thority is particularly salient in public service organizations, as
accountability usually follows authority.
The fourth type is information rules, which prescribe what infor-
mation is available to each position and decision. For instance, an
information rule can allow city council members to have full access
to the AI system development history and system specifications for
making the decision on city-wide adoption of the system. Informa-
tion rules are salient for the collaboration between humans and AI
systems at the micro level. At the meso level, the development of
explainable AI can assist in not only making information available
but also more understandable [3].
The payoff rules specify how benefits and costs are allocated to a
participant in a specific position. For instance, a citizen may benefit
from a digital government platform to contribute and receive city
information services such as a 311 system. A public manager may
benefit from making an AI system more transparent to gain the
trust and support of citizens. There could be costs of facility, time,
and resources for the operation of a digital government platform.
The costs can be borne by taxpayers. Some of the costs could be
borne by the users of the system.
The typology and the specifics of rules help model the gover-
nance structure and assess the governance outcomes [ 22,43]. The
governance structure includes the specifics of each type of rules
and their configuration. Rule configuration is important to under-
standing the governance structure and its impact on outcomes [ 42].
Moreover, attention will be paid to the rules-in-use, which reflect
practice better than the rules in the book. Rules-in-use structure
the actual behavior of the participants taking on various positions
and making decisions.
4.4 Governance Activities and Mechanisms
The embeddedness of levels is a key design consideration of gov-
ernance activities and mechanisms. The system context should be
commensurate with the scope of the investigation. For the interest
in public governance and service, the broad system context needs
to capture the national context that includes core public values,
typeofadministrativesystems, technologicalcapabilities, economy,
and demographics [ 55]. The meso-level governance of interorgani-
zational networks and digital government platforms is embedded
in this broader sociotechnical context. Such embeddedness recog-
nizes the important influence of values as well as administrative,
technological, and economic factors at the system context level
on prescribing and constraining the boundary of possibilities for
institutional design at the meso level. The micro-level governance
design is further conditioned and structured by the rules at both
the meso and the macro levels. A digital government platform for
coproduction of public service prescribes the respective roles of
150
DGO 2024, June 11–14, 2024, Taipei, Taiwan Yu-CheChen et al.
citizensandgovernments. Thesemeso-levelrulesgovernthedesign
of collaborative interactions between humans and AI systems.
The levels also imply the relative magnitude of effort for change
as well as trade-offs. The macro-level institutions require the most
effort for change as they are related to the changes that Ostrom
characterizes as constitutional-level change. Such change usually
requires a significant modification to the constitutions of the col-
lective. The meso-level change such as the change in collaborative
arrangement between government and citizens utilizing a digital
platform, is relatively easier than those at the constitutional level.
At the micro level, government agency managers and AI system
developers can make changes within their scope of responsibilities.
The focus of the proposed framework is governance design on
the meso level while considering the constraints and conditions at
themacrolevelandtheimplicationsofgovernanceatthemesolevel
for activities at the micro level. Moreover, the proposed framework
conceptualizes activities and dynamics by organizing around the
three areas of activities as proposed by Emerson et al. [ 18] in their
work on an integrative framework for collaborative governance,
namely principled engagement, shared motivation, and capacity
for joint action. The governance activities and mechanisms are
also informed by the literature on network governance and digital
government platforms.
4.4.1 Principled Engagement. Principled engagement, as proposed
by this framework, builds on the principles suggested by Emerson
et al. [18], expands to the inclusive incorporation of public values
and recognition of AI systems as an actor, and addresses the char-
acteristics of information and technologies. More specifically, the
guiding principles for engagement are open and civil communi-
cation and discourse, representation of stakeholder interests, and
incorporation of stakeholder perspectives and knowledge [2, 7].
These principles align with several key public value consider-
ations for the effective design of digital platforms for collabora-
tion between government, humans, and AI systems [ 12]. Such
engagement can promote equity in participation. A salient digital
participation challenge facing underserved communities is access
to broadband services. Accessibility and usability challenges can
be barriers to effective collaboration via digital government plat-
forms [36]. The implementation of collaborative platforms needs
to consider and implement an in-person supporting mechanism for
utilizing digital platforms. Such equity in participation can be sup-
ported mainly by participant rule that allows for the participation
of key stakeholder groups at a particular phase of collaboration.
For instance, the participation of the stakeholders impacted by an
AI system is considered important for achieving equity in partici-
pation. Information rules allowing for the sharing of information
to under-represented stakeholder groups can further strengthen
equity.
Engagement needs to explicitly consider AI systems as an actor
for collaborative intelligence and engage them accordingly. As
stated previously, AI can complement human actors in conduct-
ing analysis of big data and identifying emerging patterns. Such
engagement can be supported by participant rules to allow for an
explicit role for AI systems and then governed by authority rules
to delineate their decision-making authority.Transparency in engagement is particularly important for in-
cluding AI systems. Transparency is one of the primary concerns
for collaborating with AI systems [ 15]. How and why a particular
conclusion is reached by an AI system are difficult to ascertain. For
public policy and service, there is a need to actively design and
implement transparency measures to ensure a reasonable under-
standing of how and why for meaningful participation.
A digital government platform typically embodies a multitude
of public values and engagement approaches. Several civic engage-
ment projects implemented in the public sector demonstrate core
values like human dignity, digital equity, transparency, account-
ability, and democracy. For instance, Philadelphia’s Change by Us
platform empowered citizens to voice ideas to improve their neigh-
borhoods, reinforcing human dignity and democratic participation
[1]. In New York, the Big Ideas challenge exemplified transparency
and accountability by inviting citizens to submit online ideas for
applications to improve civic services [ 1]. Additionally, Helsinki’s
initiativeillustratesdigitalequityandtransparency,whereCodefor
Europe fellows created an app to catalog public museum art, and
citizens contributed by tagging uncatalogued art images [ 1]. These
open calls for ideas promoted equitable participation through digi-
tal platforms and upheld democratic values by involving citizens
directly in the service provision or policymaking.
4.4.2 Shared Motivation and Mutual Trust. The cultivation of
shared motivation and mutual trust is an important governance
activity for collaborative intelligence. Articulation of shared values
is an essential source of shared motivation. For collaborative ar-
rangements for public service, the shared motivation for improving
our society is productive. Public service motivation can explain the
energy and commitments of public service professionals [ 46]. Such
motivation can be a unifying force to bring various groups of par-
ticipants together for the creation and advancement of a common
goal. Such shared motivation is the basis for the creation of mutual
understanding, shared commitment, and mutual trust.
For digital platforms facilitating collaboration among citizens
themselves and citizens with a public-sector organization, there
are various mechanisms for creating shared motivation and mutual
trust. Citizens commonly evaluate and improve public policy or
public service ideas through voting or commenting, as seen in
platforms like Open Government Dialogue. This method is crucial
for refining outcomes, controlling content quality, and predicting
preferences[ 31]. Atransparent,fairaggregationprocessofcitizens’
input in policy idea generation and evaluation is essential to the
generation of trust [ 31]. Such a process should also respect and
value participant contributions for the generation of mutual trust.
Trust in the government systems can foster trust in e-services
[5]. The general trust in government plays an important role in
the determination of trust in government AI systems [ 63]. Build-
ing trust in government AI systems requires the consideration of
AI system qualities and openness. Governing activities such as
the participatory design in AI chatbots have shown promise in ad-
dressing the deficiency in the trust of indigenous people in the U.S.
government [ 62]. A more open participant rule can support trust
building. Moreover, an authority rule that empowers historically
marginalized stakeholder can also support trust building. Hav-
ing the representative of tribal nations to chair AI system design
151
Governance Design of Collaborative Intelligence for Public Policy and Services DGO 2024, June 11–14, 2024, Taipei, Taiwan
meeting is perceived to earn more trust from the tribal members
[62].
Transparency can enhance trusting relationships between gov-
ernmentsandcitizens[ 24]. Digitalgovernmentplatformstoengage
citizens/residents have emphasized the importance of transparency
in the aggregation of their opinions and preferences [ 31]. Informa-
tion rules can codify who can receive what information to ensure
transparency to various stakeholder groups. Transparency is con-
sidered one of the most critical factors for a trusting relationship
between humans and AI when AI systems can make independent
information utilization and analysis decisions. For public policy
and service decisions, providing transparency in the involvement
of AI in decision-making and the line of authority is important
not only for the public managers involved but also for the general
public.
4.4.3 Capacity for Joint Action. At the meso level, the capacity
for joint action includes the technical and administrative capacity.
There are activities and mechanisms that support capacity building.
There are several areas of technical capacity for digital government
networks and platforms. First is the need to address disparate data
standards to ensure quality and a service-oriented view of informa-
tion and service [ 14,16]. Second is the capability for collaborative
communication and coordination [ 13]. A shared information and
communication infrastructure helps with information-sharing and
coordination. Acommoncommunicationplatformwithknowledge
managementcapabilityhelpscoordinatethecomputingandhuman
resources available via a distributed network. Government-citizen
collaborative platforms typically have a technical infrastructure
that allows access and collaboration, such as in the case of 311
systems [ 11]. For cross-sector collaboration, the underlying infor-
mation architecture of a platform is essential, shaping how various
stakeholders, including government, businesses, civil society, and
citizens, interact [ 34]. The next area of technical capability is the
feedback to participants of the networks and platforms about their
use and contributions to the network or platform. A sophisticated
platform typically allows for a personalized participant view.
Leadership and management play a critical role in growing ad-
ministrative capability for managing digital governance networks
or platforms [ 14]. Such administrative capacity allows for the align-
ment of collaborative interactions to the goals of public policy and
services. Collaborative public managers can engage in the acti-
vation of key network member organizations to ensure certain
capacity [ 33]. Mobilization is another main area of activity that
helps address the interdependence among members of policy and
service networks [ 33] and fosters joint innovation [ 60]. For digi-
tal government platforms, administrative capacity for structuring
and implementing tasks to facilitate individual participation is im-
portant. In a citizen-facing crowd-sourcing platform, a structured
approach to matching tasks with crowd members’ specific skills
and interests enhances effectiveness [ 30]. For example, the Peer to
Patent project [ 41] structures the review as a five-step process with
clear instructions available on the project website.
At the micro level, joint action refers to the collaboration be-
tween humans and AI to complement each other. The technical
capacity for joint action requires a technical infrastructure thatallows for effective communication and collaboration. Such a tech-
nical infrastructure needs to have several qualities. First is clear
documentation of the data utilized and the respective roles of hu-
mans and AI in data input. Such documentation is important to
address potential biases in the data that are a central concern for
public service. Second is the specification of the technical capabil-
ities of AI systems. AI systems vary significantly in capabilities.
Some AI systems focus on natural language processing. Some are
specific about computer visions. Knowing the specific capability
that AI brings to the public service task is crucial for designing
and implementing appropriate collaboration. Technical capacity
for collaboration also includes the communication between AI and
humans in the predictive framework models specified by humans
and the AI’s communication with humans about the process and
results of reasoning and learning.
The administrative aspect of collaboration between humans and
AI can be modeled after the process of information acquisition,
information analysis, decision, and action selection, and then ac-
tion implementation, as suggested by the work on automation [ 44].
Humans and AI can collaborate on each of the steps depending
on their relative strengths. For instance, humans can help acquire
qualitative data from humans and convert them into digital format.
AI systems such as ChatGPT can gather publicly available digital
data. Humans can provide value-based guidance for decision and
action selection, while AI can help explore and rank various deci-
sions and their consequences. One focus should be on explainable
AI (XAI) for collaboration at various stages of the process.
4.4.4 Dynamics and Feedback Loop. The three aforementioned ar-
eas of activities interlock with one another to form various dynam-
ics. Principled engagement can provide guidance for the key values
to advance in developing capacity for joint actions. For instance,
principled engagement can promote openness and transparency
to help build joint capacity to address bias and digital inequity.
Principled engagement can foster the creation and sustainability
of shared motivation and mutual trust. An increased level of trust
allows for a more involved engagement of the participants. For
public service, a unifying and anchored motivation is the public
service contribution to our society. Such shared motivation helps
activate and mobilize resources for building capacity for joint ac-
tion. Given the resource interdependence between actors both at
the meso (network) and micro levels, such shared motivation and
mutual trust can increase the contribution of various actors to the
collective benefits.
Action can be taken to drive dynamics [ 18]. The enactment of
supporting rules can enable all three areas of activity for collabo-
ration. These include participant, decision, information, authority,
and other rules that can support collaboration across organizations
and individuals. Openness in information sharing and standardiza-
tion of data for interoperability are productive [ 14,34]. Achieving
compliance with rules at the macro and meso levels is one of the
essential actions to connect the three areas of activity to impact. In
addition, enacting payoff rules in favor of individuals and groups
contributing to the network or platforms can facilitate productive
dynamics leading to impact.
These actions lead to impacts. An articulation of the impacts is
critical for focused effort. Governance of collaborative intelligence
152
DGO 2024, June 11–14, 2024, Taipei, Taiwan Yu-CheChen et al.
for public policy and service has the normative goal of public value
creation. These public values include those for society as a whole,
suchassocialequityandsocietalaccountabilityandthoseforpublic
service, such as responsiveness, efficiency, and transparency [ 4].
Taking a process perspective in a dynamic system to understand
the role of public values is important. Attention should be given to
how these values have been introduced, codified, and implemented
to lead to their impacts [12].
Asystemdynamicperspectivehighlightstheimportanceoffeed-
back loops [ 23]. A reinforcing feedback loop identifies a circular of
actions and impacts that reinforce a particular result. This could be
about the positive impact of the involvement of marginalized pop-
ulations to gain mutual understanding and trust. A balancing loop
is one that reduces a certain impact. This could be a collection of
governing activities that reduce bias in data. Advancement of tech-
nology and changes in technical capabilities are important inputs
of these feedback loops. The user-friendly task organization and
support are helpful, such as those in digital government platforms
facilitating citizen contribution to public service.
An understanding of the feedback loop assists with the adapta-
tion of the governance structure and processes. The adaptation of
rules can take place at various levels [ 18]. At the macro system
context level, these adaptations can be the initiation and implemen-
tationofnationalpolicychanges. Thesechangesarerelativelymore
challenging and time-consuming and subject to various political,
economic, and social factors. At the meso network and platform
level, these adaptations are more within the influence of the pub-
lic service managers who wish to design and implement rules to
achieve public policy and service goals. These adaptations can be
abouthavinganAIgovernanceboardthathasawiderepresentation
of various stakeholder groups rather than just the government. An-
otherexampleisthechangeintransparencyrequirementstoensure
the data, goals, and involvement of AI in public decision-making
are understandable by the general public.
5 CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE RESEARCH
OPPORTUNITIES
This paper develops a conceptual framework for the governance
of collaborative intelligence for public policy and services. The
goal is to advance governance design for public value creation.
This framework builds on the scholarly foundation of collabora-
tive governance that focuses on rules and addresses levels and
dynamics. Moreover, this framework integrates both technological
and administrative dimensions. The important advancement lies
both in treating AI as an actor in governance structure and process
and in the understanding of the interactions between technologies
and rules. Another important contribution is to integrate various
mechanisms of collaborative public service production, such as
digital government platforms for crowd-sourcing, into this unified
governance framework for collaborative intelligence.
The proposed framework provides a further specification on the
role of public values and the type of rules. Public values are the
outcomes of the governance of collaborative intelligence for public
policy and service. A broader frame of public values goes beyond
service-oriented public values to include society-oriented ones [ 4].
Governance design for collaborative intelligence can introduce,codify, implement, and produce these values [ 12]. The typology of
rulesoffersamoreanalyticalapproachtoidentifyinganddesigning
a specific type of rule for impact, such as participant rule to include
marginalized stakeholders for equity. The typology of rules can
offer the specifics for governance and allow for tracing the impact
of a particular type of rule.
Moreover, the proposed framework places emphasis on gover-
nance actions and system dynamics in the context of levels. The
three areas of activity are principled engagement, shared motiva-
tion and mutual trust, and technical and administrative capacity
for joint action, adapted from the areas of collaborative dynamics
as proposed by Emerson and Nabatchi [ 18] with an enhanced fo-
cus on digital technology and artificial intelligence. The proposed
framework distinguishes between reinforcing and balancing feed-
back loops and models feedback to identify governance design and
implementation opportunities.
Future research opportunities include development in the fol-
lowing areas. The first is to study specific cases to help refine and
update the framework. These cases can show how a specific col-
laboration dynamic takes place and its impact on the public value
outcomes. A rich collection of cases should feature a diversity of
contexts and dynamics. The second is to have more specifications
on the rules and, more importantly, rule configuration. The work
on formalizing these rules and conducting computational analysis
[22] is particularly helpful. At the same time, more empirical work
needs to be done on the rules in practice to enhance our under-
standing of the dynamics. Lastly, a productive area of development
istoexaminetheco-evolutionofhumansandAIinthefastdevelop-
ment of AI capabilities. The fast development of both generic and
specific AI offers research opportunities for evolving collaboration
betweenhumansandAIandidentifyingsomeenduringgovernance
mechanisms for public value creation.
REFERENCES
[1][1] Almirall, E. et al.2014. Open innovation requires integrated competition-
community ecosystems: Lessons learned from civic open innovation. Business
horizons . 57, 3 (2014), 391–400.
[2][2]Ansell,C.andGash,A.2008.CollaborativeGovernanceinTheoryandPractice.
Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory . 18, 4 (2008), 543–572.
[3][3] Arrieta, A.B. etal.2020. Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI): Concepts,
Taxonomies, Opportunities and Challenges toward Responsible AI. Information
Fusion. 58, (2020), 82–115.
[4][4] Bannister, F. and Connolly, R. 2014. ICT, Public Values and Transformative
Government: A Framework and Programme for Research. Government Informa-
tion Quarterly . 31, 1 (2014), 119–128.
[5][5] Belanche, D. et al.2014. Trust transfer in the continued usage of public
e-services. Information & Management . 51, 6 (2014), 627–640.
[6][6] Bernhard, I. and Wihlborg, E. 2022. Bringing all clients into the system–
Professional digital discretion to enhance inclusion when services are automated.
Information Polity . 27, 3 (2022), 373–389.
[7][7] Bingham, L.B. et al.2005. The New Governance: Practices and Processes
for Stakeholder and Citizen Participation in the Work of Government. Public
Administration Review . 65, 5 (2005), 547–558.
[8][8]Bullock,J. etal.2020.ArtificialIntelligence,BureaucraticForm,andDiscretion
in Public Service. Information Polity: The International Journal of Government &
DemocracyintheInformationAge . 25, 4 (2020), 491–506. DOI:https://doi.org/10.
3233/IP-200223.
[9][9] Bullock, J. 2019. Artificial Intelligence, Discretion, and Bureaucracy. American
Review of Public Administration . 49, 7 (2019), 751–761.
[10][10] Busuioc, M. 2021. Accountable Artificial Intelligence: Holding Algorithms
to Account. PublicAdministrationReview . 81, 5 (Sep. 2021), 825–836. DOI:https:
//doi.org/10.1111/puar.13293.
[11][11] Chen, Y.-C. 2010. Citizen-Centric E-Government Services: Understanding
Integrated Citizen Service Information Systems. Social Science Computer Review .
28, 4 (2010), 427–442.
153
Governance Design of Collaborative Intelligence for Public Policy and Services DGO 2024, June 11–14, 2024, Taipei, Taiwan
[12][12] Chen, Y.-C. and Ahn, M. 2022. Governing AI Systems for Public Values: De-
sign Principles and a Process Framework. TheOxfordHandbookofAIGovernance .
J.B. Bullock et al., eds. Oxford University Press.
[13][13] Chen, Y.-C. and Knepper, R. 2017. Cyberinfrastructure for Collaborative
Scientific Networks: Institutional Design and Management Strategies. Routledge
HandbookonInformationTechnologyinGovernment . Y.-C. Chen and M. Ahn, eds.
Routledge. 341–361.
[14][14] Chen, Y.-C. and Lee, J. 2018. Collaborative Data Networks for Public Service:
Governance, Management, and Performance. PublicManagementReview . 20, 5
(2018), 672–690.
[15][15] Criado, J.I. etal.2020. Algorithmic transparency and bureaucratic discretion:
ThecaseofSALERearlywarningsystem. InformationPolity .25,4(2020),449–470.
[16][16] Dawes, S.S. 2009. Governance in the Digital Age: A Research and Action
Framework for an uncertain Future. Government Information Quarterly . 26, 2
(2009), 257–264.
[17][17] Dellermann, D. et al.2019. Hybrid intelligence. Business & Information
Systems Engineering . 61, (2019), 637–643.
[18][18] Emerson, K. et al.2012. An Integrative Framework for Collaborative Gover-
nance.Journal of Public Administration Research & Theory . 22, 1 (2012), 1–29.
[19][19] Engstrom, D.F. etal.2020.GovernmentbyAlgorithm: ArtificialIntelligencein
Federal Administrative Agencies . Administrative Conference of the United States.
[20][20] Eom, S.-J. and Lee, J. 2022. Digital government transformation in turbulent
times: Responses, challenges, and future direction. Government Information
Quarterly . 39, 2 (Apr. 2022), 101690. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2022.101690.
[21][21] Eubanks, V. 2017. Automating Inequality: How High-Tech Tools Profile, Police,
and Punish the Poor . St. Martin’s Press.
[22][22] Frantz, C.K. and Siddiki, S. 2022. Institutional Grammar . Springer.
[23][23] Ghaffarzadegan, N. et al.2011. How Small System Dynamics Models Can
Help the Public Policy Process. System Dynamics Review . 27, 1 (January-March)
(2011), 22–44.
[24][24] Im, T. etal.2014. Internet, Trust in Government, and Citizen Compliance.
Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory . 24, 3 (2014), 741–763.
[25][25] Jilke, S. et al.2019. Microbrook, Mesobrook, Macrobrook. Perspectives on
Public Management and Governance . 2, 4 (2019), 245–253. DOI:https://doi.org/10.
1093/ppmgov/gvz015.
[26][26] Kamar, E. 2016. Directions in Hybrid Intelligence: Complementing AI Sys-
tems with Human Intelligence.
[27][27] Kim, S. et al.2022. Platform Government in the Era of Smart Technology.
PublicAdministrationReview . 82, 2 (Mar. 2022), 362–368. DOI:https://doi.org/10.
1111/puar.13422.
[28][28] Latour, B. 2005. ReassemblingtheSocial: AnIntroductiontoActor-Network-
Theory. Oxford University Press.
[29][29] Liu, H.K. 2021. Crowdsourcing: Citizens as coproducers of public services.
Policy & Internet . 13, 2 (Jun. 2021), 315–331. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1002/poi3.249.
[30][30] Liu, H.K. 2017. Crowdsourcing Government: Lessons from Multiple Disci-
plines.Public Administration Review . 77, 5 (September/October) (2017), 656–667.
[31][31] Liu, H.K. 2017. Exploring Online Engagement in Public Policy Consultation:
The Crowd or the Few? AustralianJournalofPublicAdministration . 76, 1 (Mar.
2017), 33–47. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-8500.12209.
[32][32] Marsh, S. 2020. Councils scrapping use of algorithms in benefit and welfare
decisions. The Guardian .
[33][33] McGuire, M. 2002. Managing Networks: Propositions on What Managers
Do and Why They Do It. Public Administration Review . 62, 5 (2002), 599–609.
[34][34] Meijer, A. and Boon, W. 2021. Digital platforms for the co-creation of public
value.Policy& Politics . 49, 2 (2021), 231–248.
[35][35] Mergel, I. etal.2019. Defining digital transformation: Results from expert
interviews. GovernmentInformationQuarterly .36,4(Oct.2019),101385.DOI:https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2019.06.002.
[36][36] Mergel, I. 2011. Using wikis in government: A guide for public managers.
(2011).
[37][37]Mikhaylov, S.J. etal.2018.ArtificialIntelligenceforthePublicSector: Oppor-
tunities and Challenges of Cross-sector Collaboration. Philosophical Transactions
of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences . 376, 2128
(2018), 20170357.
[38][38] Milano, S. etal.2020. Recommender systems and their ethical challenges. AI
&SOCIETY . 35, 4 (Dec. 2020), 957–967. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1007/s00146-020-
00950-y.
[39][39] Nabatchi, T. et al.2017. Varieties of Participation in Public Services: The
Who, When, and What of Coproduction. PublicAdministrationReview . 77, 5 (Sep.
2017), 766–776. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1111/puar.12765.
[40][40] Noveck, B.S. 2015. SmartCitizens,SmarterState: TheTechnologiesofExpertise
and the Futureof Governing . Harvard University Press.
[41][41]Noveck,B.S.2009.Wikigovernment: Howtechnologycanmakegovernment
better, democracy stronger, and citizens more powerful. Brookings Institution
Press.
[42][42] Ostrom, E. 2010. Institutional Analysis and Development: Elements of the
Framework in Historical Perspective. Historical Developments and TheoreticalApproachesinSociology . C. Crothers, ed. EOLSS (Encyclopedia of Life Support
Systems) Publishers, Co. Ltd. 261–288.
[43][43] Ostrom, E. etal.1994.Rules,GamesandCommon-PoolResources . The Univer-
sity of Michigan Press.
[44][44] Parasuraman, R. et al.2000. A Model for Types and Levels of Human Inter-
action with Automation. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics -
Part A: Systems and Humans . 30, 3 (2000), 286–297.
[45][45] Peeters, R. and Widlak, A. 2018. The digital cage: Administrative exclusion
through information architecture – The case of the Dutch civil registry’s master
data management system. GovernmentInformationQuarterly . 35, (2018), 175–183.
[46][46]Perry,J.2000.BringSocietyIn: TowardaTheoryofPublic-ServiceMotivation.
Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory . 10, 2 (2000), 471–488.
[47][47] Provan, K. and Kenis, P. 2008. Modes of Network Governance: Structure,
Management, and Effectiveness. JournalofPublicAdministrationResearchand
Theory. 18, 2 (2008), 229–252.
[48][48]Provan,K.G.andMilward,B.2001.DoNetworksReallyWork? AFramework
for Evaluating Public-Sector Organizational Networks. Public Administration
Review. 61, 4 (2001), 414–423.
[49][49] Russell, S.J. and Norvig, P. 2015. ArtificialIntelligence: AModernApproach .
Pearson India.
[50][50] Schiff, K.J. 2023. Does collective citizen input impact government service
provision? Evidence from SeeClickFix requests. Public administration review .
(2023). DOI:https://doi.org/10.1111/puar.13747.
[51][51] Schweik, C. and Kitsing, M. 2010. Applying Elinor Ostrom’s Rule Classifica-
tion Framework to the Analysis of Open Source Software Commons. Transna-
tional Corporations Review . 2, 1 (2010), 13–16.
[52][52] Schweik, C.M. 2014. Toward the Comparison of Open Source Commons
Institutions. Governing knowledge commons . B.M. Frischmann et al., eds. Oxford
University Press.
[53][53] Scupola, A. and Mergel, I. 2022. Co-production in digital transformation of
public administration and public value creation: The case of Denmark. Govern-
mentInformationQuarterly . 39, 1 (2022), 101650. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
giq.2021.101650.
[54][54] Stewart, C.A. et al.2019. Cyberinfrastructure, Cloud Computing, Science
Gateways, Visualization, and Cyberinfrastructure Ease of Use. Advanced Method-
ologies and Technologies in Network Architecture, Mobile Computing, and Data
Analytics . M. Khosrow-Pour, ed. IGI Global. 157–170.
[55][55] Stillman II, R. 2004. TheAmericanBureaucracy: TheCoreofModernGovern-
ment. Wadsworth/Thomson Learning.
[56][56] Suran, S. et al.2022. Building Global Societies on Collective Intelligence:
Challenges and Opportunities. Digital Government: Research and Practice . 3, 4
(Oct. 2022), 1–6. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3568169.
[57][57] Teisman, G. etal.2009. Managing Complex Governance Systems: Dynamics,
Self-Organization, and Coevolution in Public Investment. Taylor and Francis.
[58][58] Thomas, J.C. 2012. Citizen, Customer, Partner: Engaging the Public in Public
Management . M.E. Sharpe.
[59][59] Todolí-Signes, A. 2019. Algorithms, artificial intelligence and automated
decisions concerning workers and the risks of discrimination: the necessary
collectivegovernanceofdataprotection. Transfer: EuropeanReviewofLabourand
Research . 25, 4 (2019), 465–481. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1177/1024258919876416.
[60][60] Torfing, J. et al.2019. Transforming the Public Sector Into an Arena for
Co-Creation: Barriers, Drivers, Benefits, and Ways Forward. Administration&
Society. 51, 5 (2019), 795–825. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1177/0095399716680057.
[61][61] U. S. National Science Foundation and NSF 2019. National Artificial Intel-
ligence (AI) Research Institutes: Accelerating Research, Transforming Society,
and Growing the American Workforce (Program Solicitation).
[62][62] Wang, Y.-F. 2023. Artificial Intelligence System Codesign with Native Amer-
ican Communities for Tribal Emergency Management. University of Nebraska at
Omaha.
[63][63] Wang, Y.-F. et al.2023. Citizens’ intention to follow recommendations from
a government-supported AI-enabled system. Public Policy and Administration .
(May 2023), 095207672311761. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1177/09520767231176126.
[64][64] Wirtz, B.W. et al.2019. Artificial Intelligence and the Public Sector—
Applications and Challenges. International Journal of Public Administration . 42, 7
(2019), 596–615.
[65][65]Wirtz,B.W. etal.2020.TheDarkSidesofArtificialIntelligence: AnIntegrated
AI Governance Framework for Public Administration. InternationalJournalof
Public Administration . 43, 9 (Jul. 2020), 818–829. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1080/
01900692.2020.1749851.
[66][66] Wirtz, B.W. and Müller, W.M. 2019. An integrated artificial intelligence
framework for public management. Public Management Review . 21, 7 (2019),
1076–1100.
[67][67] Young, M.M. et al.2019. Artificial discretion as a tool of governance: a
framework for understanding the impact of artificial intelligence on public ad-
ministration. Perspectives on Public Management and Governance . 2, 4 (2019),
301–313.
[68][68] Young, M.M. etal.2021. Artificial intelligence and administrative evil. Per-
spectives on Public Management and Governance . 4, 3 (2021), 244–258.
154
DGO 2024, June 11–14, 2024, Taipei, Taiwan Yu-CheChen et al.
[69][69] Zuiderwijk, A. et al.2021. Implications of the use of artificial intelligence
in public governance: A systematic literature review and a research agenda.GovernmentInformationQuarterly . 38, 3 (Mar. 2021), 1–19. DOI:https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.giq.2021.101577.
155
