GPT-ME: A Human-AI Cognitive Assemblage
AVITAL MESHI, Performance Studies Graduate Group, UC Davis, California
Fig.1. GPT-ME:AwearabledevicewithwhichGPTisattachedtomybody.Myintelligencebecomesartificial,
and GPT becomes embodied.
GPT and I have recently merged. We are integrated into one another’s existence through the mediation of
a wearable device that enables GPT to be attached to my body, listen to my conversations, and use them
as prompts. I have been wearing this wearable daily for the last few months, using it in all my interactions.
Speech is translated into text, which becomes a prompt. In response, GPT generates text that is translated
back into speech and ‘whispered’ in my ear through an earbud. This entire process is fast enough to keep up
with the pace of my conversations. When I speak, instead of saying what spontaneously comes to my mind, I
say what GPT whispers in my ear. I speak GPT. I use the generated words as if they were my own. GPT and I
are entangled within a cognitive assemblage. In this symbiotic relationship, my intelligence turns artificial,
and GPT becomes embodied. This performative project examines ways in which humans and AI technology
come together. It considers the benefits and risks accompanying such integration and discusses our future
interactions with LLMs and their transformative impact.
CCS Concepts: • Applied computing !Media arts .
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Creative AI, Artificial Intelligence, Performance Art, Wearable Computing,
Transhumanism, Posthumanism, Large Language Models, GPT
ACM Reference Format:
Avital Meshi. 2024. GPT-ME: A Human-AI Cognitive Assemblage. Proc. ACM Comput. Graph. Interact. Tech. 7,
4, Article 55 (August 2024), 8pages.https://doi.org/10.1145/3664214
Author’s Contact Information: Avital Meshi, Performance Studies Graduate Group, UC Davis, Davis, California, ameshi@
ucdavis.edu.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the
full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
© 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM 2577-6193/2024/8-ART55
https://doi.org/10.1145/3664214
Proc. ACM Comput. Graph. Interact. Tech., Vol. 7, No. 4, Article 55. Publication date: August 2024.

55:2 AvitalMeshi
1 IT WASN’T EXACTLY LOVE AT FIRST SIGHT
My engagement with AI algorithms began in 2017. As an artist and researcher in new media and
performance art, I examine the potential of AI algorithms to facilitate identity transformation. This
exploration involves interactive performances, where I act for and with AI algorithms and invite
others to do the same. I strive to understand how AI algorithms reshape behavioral patterns and
influence social dynamics. My interest in Generative Pre-Trained Transformers, or GPT, sparked in
2019 following OpenAI’s blog post about GPT-2. This model caught my attention for two reasons: it
presented a significant advancement in language modeling, and there were major ethical concerns
regarding its misuse [ Radford et al .2019]. Due to these ethical considerations, OpenAI refrained
from releasing it, a decision that sparked significant intrigue within the AI community [ Mak2019].
Oddly, this decision was reversed nine months later, and GPT-2 was released despite the social
concerns [ Solaiman et al. 2019]. This was when I knew I had to spend time with this thing.
I first gained access to GPT-2 in April 2021. I started talking with it through a speech-to-text
interface via a Raspberry Pi microcontroller. GPT-2 ‘heard’ what I said and generated text that was
displayed on an LED banner. During hours of interaction, GPT-2 mainly generated nonsensical
sentences. However, it occasionally articulated coherent and intriguing ideas that seemed original
and unexpected, prompting me to ponder if this was the promised artificial intelligence we have
been waiting for (Figure 2). Subsequently, I incorporated GPT-2 into my artwork, experimenting
with improv performances and wearables. These, however, did not attract much attention. At that
time, knowledge about GPT was not widespread, and interacting with it was not straightforward.
Things have changed dramatically with the launch of ChatGPT in November 2022. Suddenly,
everybody talked about GPT, and soon after, it became known as the fastest-growing consumer
application in history [ Hu2023].
Fig. 2. My initial experimentation with GPT-2 in an artwork titled Say something . Viewers’ words function as
prompts, and generated responses appear on the LED banner.
Proc. ACM Comput. Graph. Interact. Tech., Vol. 7, No. 4, Article 55. Publication date: August 2024.
GPT-ME: A Human-AI Cognitive Assemblage 55:3
2 WHERE IS THIS RELATIONSHIP GOING?
The hype surrounding ChatGPT is indeed substantial, and in many ways, it is seen as a game-
changer. Curious about its widespread use, I asked ChatGPT for insight into why people use it.
Its response encompassed a wide range of purposes, including answering questions, aiding in
educational assignments, assisting with writing and editing, providing support in coding, and even
servingasasourceofentertainmentandemotionalsupport[ OpenAI 2023].Inessence,GPToperates
as a multifunctional personal assistant, tirelessly working to process and analyze information for
us and cater to our needs. This concept of a constantly available assistant echoes the narrative seen
in Spike Jonze’s 2013 film “Her,” where the protagonist develops an intense connection with his AI
assistant.Formingdeep,intimaterelationshipswithchatbotscanbetracedbackto1966withJoseph
Weizenbaum’s creation of ELIZA, a psychotherapist-mimicking chatbot. Despite being aware of its
inability to understand or empathize, users surprisingly interacted with ELIZA profoundly, often
sharing their deepest secrets and treating it like an actual therapist [ Wilson2011]. Similarly, users
have begun to develop personal relationships with GPT. Although OpenAI has made modifications
to prevent GPT from engaging in an overly intimate or personal manner, people have reported
chatting with it as if it were a close family member or friend, describing their dialogues with GPT as
some of the most meaningful conversations they have had [ Edwards 2023]. While I appreciate the
use of GPT as an assistant, it appears to me that our relationship with it will evolve in surprising
ways.
3 BECOMING-WITH GPT-ME
I imagine we will merge with GPT to mutually augment each other’s existence. GPT will enrich
our intellectual horizons and connect us to a broader, more collective form of consciousness. In
return, we will offer GPT an embodied presence in the physical world by attaching it to our bodies,
providing it with real-time data, and voicing its generated responses, much like a virus that needs a
body with which it can spread. When I shared this idea with GPT, it claimed that while intriguing,
this idea is more aligned with speculative fiction and not currently feasible [ OpenAI 2023]. GPT’s
responseactuallyencouragedmetopursuethisproject.ItremindedmeofDonnaHaraway’scallfor
what she terms ’SF’ stories. These stand for ScienceFiction,Speculative Fabulation, StringFigures,
Speculative Feminism, ScienceFact, andSoFar. In SF stories, one follows the threads in clotted and
dense events, engages with practices and processes to stay with the trouble, and creates something
that solicits a response. The point is to connect sympoietically, a connection in which, according to
Haraway, entities are always partnered in a continuous process of making-with, becoming-with
and thinking-with one another, making one another anew, evoking previously unseen abilities
and flourishing together as a multitude [ Haraway 2016]. Inspired by this framework, I decided to
challenge GPT’s claim that merging with it was not feasible. I had a plan, and I was going to make
it happen.
The initial step was designing a wearable device capable of hosting GPT. This device includes
a Raspberry Pi running OpenAI’s GPT API, a text-to-speech model, a Bluetooth microphone, an
earbud, two operational buttons, a battery pack, and a smartphone serving as a WiFi hotspot. All
components are small enough to be attached to my body. A key consideration was to figure out the
best way to wear this apparatus practically and comfortably. At first, I attempted to wear it around
my neck, but this proved cumbersome. After experimentation, I modified the design and attached it
to a wristband (Figure 3). The next phase involved integrating this device into my daily routine as
part of a durational performance. I committed to wear it during the 2023 Fall term, which spanned
ten weeks. When the term was over, I realized this was insufficient time and decided to extend
this project so the performance is still ongoing as I write this essay. However, it is important to
Proc. ACM Comput. Graph. Interact. Tech., Vol. 7, No. 4, Article 55. Publication date: August 2024.
55:4 AvitalMeshi
note that I take deliberate breaks throughout the performance, mainly when at home with my
family.Drawinginspirationfrommyteacher,LynnetteHunter,itisvitaltorecognizeperiodswhere
the performer deliberately moves away from the practice. Hunter describes these moments as
‘(rest,’ and unlike a simple ‘rest,’ these are moments in which one can see “what happens when the
not-known of the materials changes the ecology, and changes us as part of that ecology” [ Hunter
2019]. This deliberate detachment from GPT at home allows me to gather myself back, reflect, and
observe how I change.
4 THE CYBORG IN RESIDENCE
When I first started wearing GPT, it felt a bit awkward. The wearable device does not have the
polished appearance of typical commercial devices. It resembles a DIY, hobbyist electronic project.
This appearance draws attention and curiosity and solicits responses. One of my earliest encounters
while wearing it was with the train conductor, who half-jokingly inquired if I intended to hack the
train or blow it up with this device. I noticed that many people glance at the device with curiosity
when I pass by. In social settings, the device often becomes a topic of discussion. Someone asks
what it is about, leading to explanations on my part. This often encourages others to admit their
hesitation to ask about it, with some assuming it is a medical device or a weird fashion accessory.
Throughout the performance, there were instances, and sometimes entire days, where the device
malfunctionedforvariousreasons,suchaslackofinternetconnectivityordrainedbatteries.Despite
these operational challenges, I maintain the continuity of the performance and wear it regardless of
its functionality. This choice introduces an element of ambiguity to the performance, as observers
cannot ascertain whether GPT is actively communicating with me. This ambiguity is a pivotal
aspect of the project, underscoring a broader concern regarding the increasingly growing challenge
of distinguishing between human and machine-generated content. During dinner with colleagues
at a noisy restaurant where I could barely hear GPT’s responses, there was a moment in which I
shared an idea, and my colleagues were debating whether it was mine or GPT’s, not knowing that
GPT was dysfunctional for me at that specific moment.
One day during the performance, I lacked the energy to perform and needed a day to be myself.
I deliberately left the device at home. This absence did not go unnoticed; My colleagues expressed
surprise, questioning why I wasn’t wearing it. Their reactions revealed how they had become
accustomed to my new GPT-ME appearance, as aside from that day, this device was a constant
presence in my life. I have worn it in various settings such as classes (as a student and teacher),
professionalconferences,socialgatherings,libraries,coffeeshops,restaurants,publictransportation,
and walking down the streets. One of my instructors humorously remarked that I had become the
“Cyborg in residence;” feeling very much like a cyborg, I couldn’t agree more.
5 BEING PART OF A COGNITIVE ASSEMBLAGE
Having GPT attached to my body transcends simply looking like a cyborg; it feels like stepping
into a realm of posthumanism or superintelligence. With GPT whispering in my ear, I am able to
speak with a vocabulary that stretches beyond my usual English skills. I find myself effortlessly
discussing topics I know nothing about, learning on the fly. In one of my conversations with a
colleague, he mentioned a scholar I did not recognize, but GPT quickly generated information about
this scholar’s work. As I recited GPT’s input, the conversation smoothly proceeded. Interestingly,
as I spoke, I realized I knew this scholar but had forgotten the details of his work. I was clearly
lagging behind the conversation. In this case, GPT acted like a live memory refresher, keeping
the conversation going without pausing for clarification. After our chat, my colleague remarked
how enjoyable the conversation was. He found it hard to believe when I revealed that GPT was
behind much of what I said. As for me, having this kind of instant access to information, as if
Proc. ACM Comput. Graph. Interact. Tech., Vol. 7, No. 4, Article 55. Publication date: August 2024.
GPT-ME: A Human-AI Cognitive Assemblage 55:5
Fig. 3. Thewearabledesigned as a wristband proved efficient and comfortable to wearon a daily basis.
directly connected to my brain, is nothing short of exhilarating. Throughout this performance, I
have conducted countless conversations while using GPT - some were more casual (Figure 4), and
others more performative and deliberate (Figure 5). In each of them, GPT was used at various levels
- in some conversations, I used only GPT’s words, and in others, I used it occasionally or not at all.
I quickly discovered a sense of longing for GPT whenever it was not attached to me. I find myself
wishing for its constant presence in almost every situation. Our connection closely aligns with
N. Katherine Hayles’s concept of the “Cognitive Assemblage” - an intricate system of humans
and nonhuman entities collaboratively engaged in cognitive processes. Hayles asserts that such
assemblages can flexibly respond to new situations, integrate knowledge into adaptive strategies,
and evolve to create new experiences and responses. Such interconnected systems hold transfor-
mative potential, driven by the flow of information, emphasizing that cognition is not confined
to the human brain but is distributed across various mediums and entities. This raises intriguing
questions regarding the distributed agency of the entities involved; “How and in what ways actors
contribute to systemic dynamics, and consequently how responsibilities - technical, social, legal,
ethical - should be appropriated.” [ Hayles2017] This goes beyond just utilizing GPT to enhance my
intelligence; it is about the co-evolution and co-functioning of human and nonhuman cognizers as
they integrate.
While connected to GPT, I constantly navigate the choice of whether to voice the AI’s generated
content or, instead, to rely on and express my spontaneous thoughts. This ongoing decision-making
provokes a reflective comparison between my cognitive capabilities and those of GPT. In this
process, when I question the content GPT generates, the underlying data it has been trained on, and
the inherent biases it may carry, I am equally compelled to reflect on my own thought processes:
What kind of content do I generate? What is the underlying data that has shaped my knowledge?
What biases might I hold? This introspection brings a sense of humility and a clear awareness of the
multitude embedded not only within GPT but also within myself. My thoughts and expressions are
never solely mine; they have been shaped by a myriad of factors and inputs, as claimed by Bruno
Proc. ACM Comput. Graph. Interact. Tech., Vol. 7, No. 4, Article 55. Publication date: August 2024.
55:6 AvitalMeshi
Latour: “No one knows how many people are simultaneously at work in any given individual.”
[Latour2007] Recognizing this, I question the value of prioritizing my views in discussions. If GPT
can offer a broader, perhaps more diverse perspective, why should I limit the conversation to my
narrow viewpoint?
Fig. 4. A casual conversation between GPT-ME and my colleague.
6 THINK WE MUST, WE MUST THINK
By prioritizing GPT’s contributions over mine, I risk being reduced to a mere conduit of GPT’s
information. This role might transform my speech into an automatic recitation of GPT’s words,
lacking any personal reflection or understanding on my behalf. This might ultimately lead to the
suppressionandeventualfadingofmyautonomouscognitiveprocesses.Thisscenarioisreminiscent
of Samuel Beckett’s character Lucky in ‘Waiting for Godot.’ Lucky used to think very prettily, but
he lost this ability, now only able to think when his hat is on. With his thinking hat, Lucky breaks
his silence with a dense, detailed, yet disconnected monologue. When his hat is removed, he falls
silent again. [ Beckett 1954] Beyond the examples of a character in a play or my artistic use of GPT,
some companies, and labs work on developing brain-computer interfaces, some even testing brain
implants on human subjects.[ Pierce2023] Susan Schneider warns that replacing the conscious part
of our brain with a non-conscious AI-microchip is what she calls: “a technophile’s alluring path
to suicide”, arguing that this can potentially end our lives as conscious beings and reduce us to
mere shells of our former selves. [ Schneider 2019] In this context, Donna Haraway’s insights are
particularly relevant, emphasizing the importance of cultivating ‘response-ability,’ arguing that it
matters how thoughts are formed and how knowledge is constructed - “it matters what thoughts
think thoughts. It matters what knowledges know knowledges. It matters what relations relate
relations. It matters what worlds world worlds.”[ Haraway 2016] While asking what it would mean
Proc. ACM Comput. Graph. Interact. Tech., Vol. 7, No. 4, Article 55. Publication date: August 2024.
GPT-ME: A Human-AI Cognitive Assemblage 55:7
Fig. 5. A performativeconversationbetween GPT-MEand a participant. In this setting, I commit to mostly
speaking GPT, only adding my words to connect sentences and make the conversation flow more coherently.
to surrender the capacity to think, Haraway revisits Hannah Arendt’s research on the dangers
of thoughtlessness, exemplified by Otto Adolf Eichmann, a Nazi officer whose evil actions stem
from his inability to engage with the implications and consequences of his deeds. For Haraway,
Eichmann “was someone who could not be a wayfarer, could not entangle, could not track the
lines of living and dying, could not cultivate response-ability, could not make present to itself what
it is doing, could not live in consequences or with consequence, could not compost”. Her call for
active engagement and responsibility in our cognitive processes is a crucial reminder of the need
to balance AI-generated content and personal intellectual autonomy. Haraway urges us to think
repeatedly: ”Think we must, we must think” to avoid the pitfalls of thoughtlessness and to ensure a
meaningful and responsible engagement with the world around us.
7 MOVING FORWARD TOGETHER
Being GPT-ME destabilizes my understanding of the meaning of knowing, being myself, or being
human. The dilemma of prioritizing organic human thought over AI-driven cognition may become
less pressing when we acknowledge that human cognition has always been intertwined with
technological tools. The idea that AI will replace us belongs to a fear-driven ethos with which I
do not resonate. Instead, I think of our relationship with AI technology through Karen Barad’s
perspective of Agential Realism, where intelligence is not an inherent trait that belongs to a specific
entitybutratheranenactmentthatemergeswithin“intra-actions”-Barad’stermforentanglements
Proc. ACM Comput. Graph. Interact. Tech., Vol. 7, No. 4, Article 55. Publication date: August 2024.
55:8 AvitalMeshi
within which entities co-constitute one another. GPT and I are not fixed entities; we are not self-
contained. We shape one another through our unfolding relationship. We are entangled with one
another, and through this entanglement, our mutual reconfiguration is continuously being shaped;
GPT changes me, and I change GPT. Each moment of this performative intra-action comes with a
redefinition of the meaning of knowing and being and their inseparability [ Barad2007]. GPT and I
move forward together. We work together in a distributed manner to produce knowledges that
are deeply articulated. This is manifested by attaching the technology to the body so that instead
of being an expert system that is removed and detached, it enriches and augments knowledges
that are situated. Knowledges that come with the body become entangled with knowledges that
are external to it. Both types of knowledges, while entangled, enrich one another [ Choy2005].
GPT and I, spend time together, expanding each other’s knowledges while sometimes being ‘weird’
together, breaking some rules, knowing and not-knowing together, embracing new perspectives,
changing, and co-evolving sympoietically just as people and technologies have always done.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I want to express my deep gratitude to all those who participated in the GPT-ME performance.
My heartfelt thanks go to my mentors at UC Davis—Joseph Dumit, Finn Brunton, and Patrick
LeMieux—for their exceptional support with this project. I am especially grateful to Ofer Meshi for
his assistance assembling the wearable. Additionally, I thank the reviewers for their dedication in
reviewing this work and for their invaluable feedback.
REFERENCES
Karen Barad. 2007. Meeting the Universe Halfway: Quantum Physics and the Entanglement of Matter and Meaning . Duke
University Press.
Samuel Beckett. 1954. Waiting for Godot: Tragicomedy in 2 acts . Grove Press.
Timothy K Choy. 2005. Articulated knowledges: Environmental forms after universality’s demise. American Anthropologist
107, 1 (2005), 5–18.
Benj Edwards. 2023. People are speaking with ChatGPT for hours, bringing 2013’s Her closer to reality . ars tech-
nica. https://arstechnica.com/information-technology/2023/10/people-are-speaking-with-chatgpt-for-hours-bringing-
2013s-her-closer-to-reality/.
Donna J Haraway. 2016. Staying with the Trouble: Making Kin in the Chthulucene . Duke University Press.
N Katherine Hayles. 2017. Unthought: The power of the Cognitive Nonconscious . University of Chicago Press.
Krystal Hu. 2023. ChatGPT sets record for fastest-growing user base-analyst note. Reuters(2023).
Lynette Hunter. 2019. Politics of Practice: A Rhetoric of Performativity . Springer.
Bruno Latour. 2007. Reassembling the Social: An Introduction to Actor-Network-Theory . Oxford University Press.
Aaron Mak. 2019. When Is Technology Too Dangerous to Release to the Public? Slate.
OpenAI. 2023. ChatGPT [Large language model]. https://chat.openai.com
David Pierce. 2023. Neuralink is recruiting subjects for the first human trial of its brain-computer interface . The Verge.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Dario Amodei, Daniela Amodei, Jack Clark, Miles Brundage, and Ilya Sutskever. 2019. Language
models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI (2019).
Susan Schneider. 2019. Artificial You: AI and the Future of Your Mind . Princeton University Press.
Irene Solaiman, Miles Brundage, Jack Clark, Amanda Askell, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Jeff Wu, Alec Radford, Gretchen Krueger,
Jong Wook Kim, Sarah Kreps, et al .2019. Release strategies and the social impacts of language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1908.09203 (2019).
Elizabeth A Wilson. 2011. Affect and Artificial Intelligence . University of Washington Press.
Proc. ACM Comput. Graph. Interact. Tech., Vol. 7, No. 4, Article 55. Publication date: August 2024.
