Lyric Poetry in the Face of Posthumanism: An Analysis of
Generative AI-Assisted Poetry Writing
Yuxuan Huang
School of Creative Media
City University of Hong Kong
Hong Kong, Hong Kong
yhuang573-c@my.cityu.edu.hkJames Shea
Hong Kong Baptist University
Hong Kong, Hong Kong
james2shea@gmail.com
Daniel C. Howe
University of the Arts London
London, United Kingdom
daniel@rednoise.orgJussi Holopainen∗
School of Creative Media
City University of Hong Kong
Hong Kong, Hong Kong
jholopai@cityu.edu.hk
Abstract
Generative AI seems poised to transform a wide range of endeavors
once thought to be solely the domain of humans—from journalism
to legal practice to creative expression—into collaborative activi-
ties involving both human and machine. Poetry is no exception, as
even general-purpose language models now routinely generate con-
vincing emulations of poetic form. While researchers have closely
examined such machine-generated poetry, few have studied human-
AI collaboration in poetry writing from a posthuman perspective.
Through semi-structured interviews with ten participants in an AI
English poetry contest and an analysis of their dialogs with AIs,
we summarize the affordances and challenges of such collaborative
practice using posthumanism as a lens. We then expose interesting
tensions, for example, between human self-expression and the di-
minished (or relocated) agency that AI collaboration often entails.
This collaborative, yet often adversarial, process provides insights
into the nature of the posthuman condition as regards creative
collaboration between human and machine.
CCS Concepts
•Human-centered computing →Empirical studies in HCI ;
Natural language interfaces .
Keywords
AI-generated poetry, posthumanism, lyric poetry, human-AI co-
writing, human-machine relations, generative artificial intelligence
ACM Reference Format:
Yuxuan Huang, James Shea, Daniel C. Howe, and Jussi Holopainen. 2025.
Lyric Poetry in the Face of Posthumanism: An Analysis of Generative
∗This author is also the corresponding author.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
C&C ’25, Virtual, United Kingdom
©2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-1289-0/25/06
https://doi.org/10.1145/3698061.3726919AI-Assisted Poetry Writing. In Creativity and Cognition (C&C ’25), June
23–25, 2025, Virtual, United Kingdom. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 12 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3698061.3726919
1 INTRODUCTION
“The current generation of AIs has been trained on
vast quantities of dubiously sourced Internet text,
from the literary canon to the darkest corners of
4chan, trained to recognize a sort of lowest-common
denominator of human experience as ‘truth.’ Yet the
extent to which patterns extracted from dematerial-
ized language can act as a proxy for lived experience
is a pressing question. And while capable of impres-
sive feats of mimicry and pattern recognition, we do
well to remember that they have no bodies or sen-
sory organs, no experience of time or space, not even
memory in any commonly understood sense [31].”
Rapid improvement in the capabilities of large language mod-
els (LLMs) has enabled generative AI (GenAI) systems to produce
creative artifacts that are often difficult to distinguish from those
of humans [ 30,36,38]. Poetry is no exception, as even generic
LLMs are now capable of emulating the vocabulary, style, rhythm,
and tone of renowned historical poets [ 32]. In addition, contem-
porary artists and writers have worked extensively with LLMs for
interesting and novel poetic artifacts [35].
From a posthumanist perspective, such collaborative creative
writing with AIs, extended by technology and non-human agencies,
challenge traditional human-centered notions of writing [ 14,17,29].
For instance, when we compose on a computer, we are likely to in-
voke some or all of the following technical practices: seeking knowl-
edge support via web search, LLMs, or on websites like Wikipedia1,
checking grammar usage with software like Grammarly2storing
and/or publishing writing to the web or cloud storage, etc. Writ-
ing can no longer be separated from technical objects, and human
cognition plays a key role in interpreting information from these
1https://www.wikipedia.org/
2https://app.grammarly.com/
762

C&C ’25, June 23–25, 2025, Virtual, United Kingdom Huang et al.
technical objects [ 29]. Thus, it is not only the outputs of such collab-
orative work that are of interest but rather the network of human-
machine relations in which such AI-assisted collaboration is entan-
gled [ 2]. The focus on such relations, provided via the perspective
ofposthumanism , underlies the research presented here, examining
the collaborative, if at times adversarial, process of human-machine
co-writing. To more fully understand what it means “to write” in
such a posthuman context, apart from the thematic and aesthetic
qualities of writing, we must also attend to how humans perceive
and interpret the information presented by machines, and to how
machines may in turn shape human cognition [29].
Therefore, instead of asking whether (and how) GenAI mediation
changes the human experience of poetry writing and poem quality,
we examine the kinds of human-AI relations that emerged during
the process, leading to the following research questions:
RQ1: What forms do human-AI collaborations take in the context
of poetry creation, and in what aspects of the process do
large language models play a significant role?
RQ2: What are the specific areas of tension that arise between
human writers and their AI partners?
RQ3: What elements of the collaborative process are apparent in
the resulting outputs and which are obscured, that is to say,
how much of the collaboration is made manifest in poetic
outputs?
This research, situated within the background of an AI English
poetry competition, consists of two studies. In the first study, we
interviewed 10 individuals who participated in the competition con-
cerning their experiences and reflections on this co-writing process.
In the subsequent study, we analyzed participants’ artist statements
and documented conversation history with various GenAI models
that were submitted together with their poems. From this data we
summarize typical workflows used by participants when co-writing
with GenAI. Findings show that the collaboration between poets
and GenAI is not limited to simple prompts and answers, but is
often complicated by tensions between what the human writer
wants and what the machine provides.
2 RELATED WORK
In this section, we justify two considerations that inform our re-
search: first, our rationale for selecting collaborative poetry writing,
specifically lyric poetry, with LLMs as a means to explore human-AI
relations; and second, why posthumanism is intrinsically linked to
digital writing and is thus a particularly useful theoretical frame-
work for our study.
2.1 Lyric Poetry with LLMs
Historically poetry has been one of the most intricate and com-
plex forms of human expression, across language and cultures
[19]; one which has been continuously mediated by technology.
In recent years, the rise of GenAI has made AI-generated poetry
nearly indistinguishable from human-written poetry for non-expert
readers [ 43]. With AI tools, the writing of poetry can be a less
labor-intensive activity, with writers focusing less on writing "from
scratch" and more on the editing of text created by GenAI [ 24,40].
However, the nature of poetry writing centers on experience, not
interpretation [ 19]. Can human-GenAI collaborative writing createnew experiences for poetry, or will they simply interpret and remix
existing materials? GenAI offers new opportunities for researchers
to scrutinize emerging human-machine relations, in other words,
how creativity and cognition are distributed across human and
machine [18].
This study focuses on ten poems written by student participants
across Hong Kong. These short poems, like much poetry written
in creative writing classrooms within the university, largely follow
the traditions of lyric poetry, a form of short poetry that focuses
on the personal emotions and thoughts of the poet and is typically
written in the first person [ 6,34]. Lyric poetry is well-suited to
pedagogical contexts due to its brevity and to its familiarity among
students. One of the earliest lyric poets was Sappho, a Greek poet
from the 7thcentury BCE, known for her ability to explore themes
such as love, beauty, and selfhood. Petrarch and Shakespeare’s
love sonnets are prominent examples of the lyric tradition as it
evolved during the Renaissance. The lyric’s emphasis on individu-
ality became especially salient during the Romantic period of the
late 18thand early 19thcenturies, as seen in works by John Keats
and William Wordsworth. Short poems that express the inner self
are naturally found in non-Western traditions as well, including
Chinese, Japanese, and Persian poetry.
2.2 Posthumanism
Traditional human-centered perspectives treat the human as a dis-
crete, individual subject [ 18]. Yet digital technologies now demon-
strate capabilities once conceived of as belonging exclusively to
humans, which has led some to question what it means to be a hu-
man in the current moment [ 22,46,52]. Posthumanism is a theory
that addresses these emerging issues, emphasizing the environmen-
tal and socio-technical impacts of technology on humanity [ 18].
The term “posthuman” does not mean that we are no longer human,
nor does it mean that we are nonhuman or destined to shed our
flesh and blood [ 25]. Rather, posthumanism reconsiders the human
experience by integrating the nonhuman [ 5,48]. The category of
nonhuman (e.g., animals, artifacts, technologies, natural elements,
and even ideologies and beliefs) includes entities that participate in
social, cultural, or ecological systems but are not human [ 37,52].
Our ubiquitous entanglement with nonhumans, the theory claims,
shapes us so deeply that it makes us “posthuman” [2].
According to Hayles, posthumanism reframes human cognition
in relation to the constructed environment and to planetary ecolo-
gies encompassing both human and nonhuman entities, which she
calls cognitive assemblages [ 29]. Cognitive assemblages are com-
plex and entangled networks involving technical objects and human
actors, and cognition manifests as information, interpretations, and
meanings within these networks [ 26,29]. Similarly, Galit Wellner
argues that the symbiosis of humans and machines shifts the tradi-
tional notion of imagination to posthuman (or digital) imagination
[49,50]: imagination is no longer a uniquely human and subjective
trait but a layered model, in which imaginative tasks are shared and
distributed between humans and technology. In contrast to Hayles,
Wellner argues that humans are, at least presently, the only agents
capable of generating meaning at the uppermost layer [ 50]. The
763
Lyric Poetry in the Face of Posthumanism: An Analysis of Generative AI-Assisted Poetry Writing C&C ’25, June 23–25, 2025, Virtual, United Kingdom
concepts of both cognitive assemblages and posthuman imagina-
tion offer productive grounds for rethinking human-AI relations in
the era of GenAI.
In this research, we choose lyric poetry writing with LLMs as a
specific case to foster a more profound understanding of the two
concepts. First, the process of writing with LLMs is an interesting
testing ground for the concept of cognitive assemblage, during
which cognition circulates and evolves between humans and tech-
nology. The human poets’ phrasing, perceptions, and emotions are
mediated by GenAI, consciously or unconsciously, and the resulting
text later becomes the training data fed to GenAI in an iterative
cycle. In addition, scholars like Regina Schober argue that poetry
is a particularly useful literary form through which to reflect on
relations between humans, machines, and creativity, as it engages
the rich tapestry of human perception, emotion, and experience[ 45].
Lyric poetry, the genre of poetry through which human poets ex-
press themselves (their personal ways of interpreting information),
aligns well with the concept of cognition (the process of interpreting
information [ 29]) and posthuman imagination (humans generating
meanings at the uppermost layer [50]).
While there have been works on creative writing that explore
human-AI relations, most have not adopted a posthumanist perspec-
tive, focusing on the capabilities, usage scenarios, and limitations
of LLMs in human-AI collaboration [ 15,16]. For example, Booten
and Gero collected speculative designs for "Poetry Machines" from
professional poets, including the kinds of interactive writing in-
terfaces they felt could assist in the writing process [ 7]. Ippolito
et al. [ 33] commissioned published writers for their perspectives
on how GenAI has impacted creative writing, and on the degree
to which LLMs can benefit human creatives in the future. Gero
et al. [ 21] asked when and why a creative writer would turn to
an AI agent instead of a human assistant, but answered only from
the writers’ standpoints, focusing on their desires, perceptions,
and values. All of these works share an anthropocentric framing
of human-AI relations in which humans constitute the subject of
their research questions and AI remains primarily the object. While
understandable, the assumption of a central role for the human
in the human-AI relationship may cause researchers to overlook
interesting issues. For instance, what happens if the reader of poetry
is no longer human but a machine? orwhy should humans be the
authority in deciding whether something passes a Turing test as a
poem? [45]. The adoption of a posthumanism lens allows us to
observe how human cognition and creativity may be challenged
by GenAI, as well as to present our findings from both human and
nonhuman perspectives.
3 METHODOLOGY
In 2024, the International Writers’ Workshop(IWW) at Hong Kong
Baptist University held its inaugural AI English Poetry Competi-
tion, targeted at students from Hong Kong’s eight University Grants
Committee3-funded (UCG-funded) universities. We took this event
as an opportunity to research the collaborative process through
which people converse with generic LLMs for creative writing. Our
two-phase study consists of 1) semi-structured interviews with stu-
dents participating in the poetry competition (see Section 3.2); and
3https://www.ugc.edu.hk/eng/ugc/index.html2) reflective thematic analysis of supplementary materials, i.e., the
interviewees’ prompting history with AI chatbots during the writ-
ing process, as well as their submitted poems and artist statements
(see Section 3.3). These two phases provide insights into, first, how
the interviewees perceived their collaboration with the LLMs and,
second, how their exchanges with LLMs produced the final poems.
We did not use supplementary materials for cued recall during the
interviews, as we wanted to examine participants’ current percep-
tions of LLMs’ contribution and how LLM-mediation manifested in
the poems during composition. We hoped to find interesting issues
through this comparison and to understand why participants cited
the percentages that they did, especially those who asserted the
LLM’s contribution to be zero. The ethics committee of the City
University of Hong Kong approved this research.
3.1 AI English Poetry Competition
Founded in 2004, the IWW is a non-profit program that engages
local students, writers, and the general Hong Kong community in
creativity-inspiring activities. The competition, supported by the
IWW, took “Origins and Futures” as its theme to reflect the IWW’s
history and future directions in light of emerging technologies, such
as AI-assisted writing tools. Our second author (Acting Director of
the IWW and Associate Professor) was the main organizer of the
competition, and the third author (an artist and Associate Professor)
served as judge. Students were permitted to submit one poem of no
more than one A4-sized page, a 250-word artist statement in the
form of a description of the creative process, and a record of the
complete exchange with their AI of choice, including all prompts
and responses. They were informed that the judge would consider
the artist statement and the exchanges with the chatbot while
judging the submissions. Regarding the use of chatbots, students
were welcome to use one or more LLM chatbots at any stage during
the writing process as long as the final poem submitted was in
English. Students employed chatbots including ChatGPT4, Bard5,
Poe6, Copilot7, etc. Poems submitted by the students must not have
appeared previously online or in print.
All submissions were read anonymously and judged in equal
parts on two documents: 1) each contestant’s submitted poem and
2) the transcript of their interactions with one or more LLMs; both
of which were required for participation in the competition. While
both documents were examined separately, a key criterion for the
contest was their relationship, as it provided rare insights into the
collaborative writing process and, indeed, into the writers’ thoughts
as they composed [ 31]. Three submissions were eventually selected
for the three top prizes, including a financial reward, while two
additional submissions were given honorable mention.
3.2 Study I - Interviewing Contestants
3.2.1 Motivation & Participants. To understand writers’ views of
collaborating with LLMs in poetry writing, we collected qualitative
data by conducting semi-structured interviews with students who
attended the competition. Semi-structured interviews are common
4https://openai.com/chatgpt/
5Bard is now Gemini: https://gemini.google.com/app
6https://poe.com/
7https://copilot.microsoft.com/
764
C&C ’25, June 23–25, 2025, Virtual, United Kingdom Huang et al.
in human-computer interaction (HCI) research to facilitate one-on-
one dialogues with participants [ 39]. This method involves a flexible
interview guide where the researcher can ask for clarifications, add
questions, and follow comments for nuanced insights [20, 39].
From the contestants who attended the AI English poetry com-
petition, 21 agreed to take part in a follow-up study (i.e., our study).
We sent invitation emails to these 21 contestants and encouraged
voluntary participation driven by an interest in sharing thoughts
with us and our readers. As a result, we received 10 replies. Most of
the participants who replied were majoring in liberal arts, and all
spoke relatively fluent English. Each interview took approximately
half an hour, with the longest lasting 50 minutes. The details of the
participants’ demographics are shown in Table 1.
3.2.2 Data Collection & Reflective Thematic Analysis. All ten inter-
views were conducted in English and recorded via Zoom8with the
consent of the participants. We then transcribed the recorded videos
into text automatically using Feishu Minutes9. Manual checks and
content calibration were followed to ensure that the transcribed
text corresponded with the original videos. We then performed a
reflexive thematic analysis (RTA) to analyze the interview data.
Posthumanism served as a useful theoretical lens with which to
interpret our data, and RTA aligned well with this purpose. Formu-
lated by Braun and Clarke [ 9,10], thematic analysis (TA) is an in-
terpretative method for identifying patterns of meaning (“themes”)
within a qualitative dataset. RTA is based on TA but differs in
that the researchers’ role in knowledge production is foregrounded
[11]. Researchers are encouraged to integrate RTA with their philo-
sophical sensibility and theoretical assumptions [ 11]. Themes are
analytic outputs that creatively tell the stories of the data. The
themes derived from a dataset are neither monolithic nor definitive;
they vary based on the researcher’s theoretical and analytical skills
[11]. Therefore, RTA is particularly well-suited as it yields theory-
informed results that, in our case, are informed by posthumanism.
The data was processed in an inductive manner using open-
coding rather than a pre-established codebook [ 8,12]. Following
the six phases of RTA proposed by Braun and Clarke [ 9,10,12,13],
we first read the transcripts to familiarize ourselves with the data.
Second, 72 initial codes emerged after analyzing each of the ten con-
versations. These codes represented our preliminary understand-
ing of the original data and provided insights into the subsequent
development of themes. Third, codes were reviewed and placed
into related groups around proposed research questions to inform
themes. As a result, two candidate themes were determined. In the
fourth phase, the candidate themes were reviewed against both the
codes and the dataset to ensure they formed a coherent and com-
pelling narrative. The fifth and final phases encompassed defining,
naming, and reporting these themes, all presented in Section 4.1.
3.3 Study II - Analyzing Prompt History, Entry
Poems & Artist Statements
3.3.1 Motivation. It was noted that participants generally consid-
ered a relatively small percentage of the submitted poems to have
been AI-generated (see column “Percentage of the Poem Written by
8https://www.zoom.com/
9https://www.feishu.cn/hc/en-US/articles/022111234449-get-the-most-out-of-feishu-
minutesAI” in Table 1). Two participants went so far as to claim that not a
single word of their poems had been written by the AI (that is, “0%”).
Thus, it was not initially clear how their exchanges with chatbots
actually led to the final submitted poems. As we were interested in
this tension, in Study II, we further examined the records of their
prompts and the submitted artist statements.
3.3.2 Data Collection & RTA. Our data was sourced from the doc-
uments each participant submitted to the competition, including
their poems, artist statements, and step-by-step records of prompts
and GenAI responses. We also referenced the interview transcripts
in which they discussed how they adapted their prompts on the
path to the final version of their poem. An RTA was performed to
analyze these documents following the six phrases mentioned in
Section 3.2.2.
4 RESULTS
4.1 RTA Results (Study I)
By analyzing the interview data in Study I, we summarized two
themes from the considerations of 1) how participants perceived
LLMs themselves and LLM-generated content, 2) how their per-
ceptions influenced the poem writing, and 3) where they thought
artistry lay in AI co-written poems. The interpretation of points
1 and 2 is included in the first theme (see Section 4.1.1), and the
interpretation of point 3 is included in the second theme (see Sec-
tion 4.1.2), which takes both human and non-human entities into
account.
4.1.1 GenAI as data input for human poetry writing. While inter-
preting data, we discovered that how writers think about GenAI
often influenced how they collaborated with it for writing. In this
theme, we summarized three points from two angles: what GenAI
means to humans and how the information it provides becomes part
of human perception and cognition. There is no standard answer
for which themes should be summarized by RTA, as final themes
entirely depend on the researcher’s expertise and knowledge [ 11].
We claim that the two perspectives used to summarize themes
derive from posthumanism, especially the concept of “cognitive
assemblage”.
(1)The role of GenAI: tool or collaborator. There is an active
debate among the literary community about treating GenAI
as a collaborator or a tool during creative processes [ 42]. In
our interviews, most participants expressed their ideas that
GenAI was a tool for them. The functions of the tool varied
from offering suggestions and inspirations (e.g., to expand
or get details of an idea - P4 & P10), speeding up the writing
process (e.g., to quickly put a rough idea into a poem - P7),
and research assistance (e.g., to translate modern English to
Old English - P8; to acquire related knowledge - P1 & P3).
The remaining participants (P2, P6, & P9) appeared to view
the AI as a responsive tutor more than a collaborator, who
assisted them with the sometimes unfamiliar structures of
rhyme and meter in English poetry.
(2)GenAI’s machinic characteristics inspire. Traditionally,
humans have co-written with AI via an iterative process of
prompting in which prompts are iteratively refined over time
based on the AI’s responses, concluding when the output is
765
Lyric Poetry in the Face of Posthumanism: An Analysis of Generative AI-Assisted Poetry Writing C&C ’25, June 23–25, 2025, Virtual, United Kingdom
Table 1: The demographics of the participants in Study I
No. Gender Poetry Writing Experience Percentage
of the Poem
Written by AIDiscipline of Study
P1 Female never 10% Creative and Professional Writing
P2 Male poetry writing experience in Chinese 50% English Literature and Language
P3 Female plenty of experience in classic and cre-
ative writing∗0% English Literature and Language
P4 Female not professional; write poems as a diary
for six months10% Language Studies
P5 Male started to write poetry in Chinese in
202250% Creative and Professional Writing
P6 Male never 50% Language Studies
P7 Male joined another poetry competition
twice before60% Mathematics and Statistics
P8 Female write poetry several times per month∗0% Language Studies & Education
P9 Female write poetry in Chinese once per half-
year70% Social Work
P10 Female write stories before but not poetry 30% English Language and Literature
∗Chatbot engaged, but no AI-generated writing appeared in the submitted poem.
satisfactory [ 41]. However, from the perspective of creating
artistic value via poetry, none of the participants felt that
GenAI’s direct responses provided “qualified” inspiration, let
alone genuine artistic value: “AI is like LEGO. As a separate
brick, it might not seem significant or anything useful. It’s up
to the author to make something different or meaningful out
of the cliche stuff. ” [P5]
According to our participants, GenAI’s responses were logi-
cal, repetitive, and certain. It often attempted to be “correct”
or “proper,” yet provided answers that lacked real insight.
The AI systems’ intrinsic characteristics, in combination with
the guardrails placed by the corporations that provide them,
limited their creative ability, which is exactly what writers
value most. At the same time, however, these characteristics
provided their own form of inspiration: “I would admit that
what ChatGPT answered was a source of my inspiration, and
it did provoke my thinking, but not because it offered anything
particularly insightful or original as I would get from talking
with a human. But precisely, it was its lack of insight into any
sort of thinking that made me want to write my poem. I want
it to be a starting point for how we could use chatbots. I think
repeating is one way, and maybe their uncertainty can also be
taken advantage of. ” [P3]
(3)GenAI fails to adequately mimic human relationships.
Writers and poets often benefit from a community of like-
minded practitioners. However, our participants often found
it difficult to establish intimacy with their AI chatbots dur-
ing the co-writing process, as they might do with a human
collaborator: “I wanted to establish a sense of intimacy or
closeness with the chatbot because that is what I would do if I
were to write with another human. I attempted to treat this AI
bot as my co-writing partner, so I called the chatbot ‘darling’ to
see how it would respond to a word of affection and closeness.
But it didn’t role-play into this with me. ” [P3]Additionally, it was noted that GenAI often attempted to
respond with an overly positive attitude, seemingly trying
to persuade humans to behave well, thereby contributing
to a perceived lack of authenticity by participants: “Chat-
GPT doesn’t understand sarcasm or some of humans’ negative
emotions. It wanted me to reframe my poem to talk about the
positives of my family in a more positive tone, but that’s not
what I want. ” [P4]
Additionally, participants repeatedly expressed their belief
that GenAI was unable to feel or understand emotions. The
human-like emotions it showed in its responses were just
imitations of human emotions, they stated, behind which
were big data training and massive calculations: “Humans
initiate the emotions in the poetry, and then ChatGPT just
mimics these emotions or polishes up the language” (P2). “If
you tell the chatbot to repeat after you, for example, ‘I am
angry. ’ It could perform this task as you instructed. But I don’t
believe that the chatbot is capable of feeling anger. ” [P3]
Further, participants attached aesthetics to the emotions
behind the language. However, GenAI’s inability to generate
and express genuine human emotions made the poems it
generated feel less “real” for participants: “If we were to talk
about the aesthetics of language, the chatbot definitely was able
to do that. But at the same time, it wrote aesthetic sentences
only for the sake of it, and there was not much reason nor
intention behind it. Thus, I do not feel the touch of personality
or thinking behind it. ” [P3]
4.1.2 Novel poetic material. This theme includes two points con-
cerning how human cognition mediated by GenAI (see Section
4.1.1) could produce novel poetic material. Since posthumanism
requires us to place humans and technology on an equal footing,
we consider the uniqueness of both human and GenAI technology
in poetry writing.
766
C&C ’25, June 23–25, 2025, Virtual, United Kingdom Huang et al.
(1)The aesthetic value of flaws. Human-created flaws often
stem from emotional oversights, personal biases, or unique
interpretations, reflecting the writer’s subjective experience
and creativity. Although LLM outputs may also contain flaws,
they typically arise from algorithmic limitations and lack
genuine emotional understanding, resulting in mechanical
or generic outputs. Therefore, human-produced flaws are a
unique manifestation of human nature and vary from person
to person, rendering the poems that contain them unique,
like a personal label tagged by the poet: “It is the flaws in
poetry that make me feel familiar and comfortable. If it’s
too perfect, then it crosses the line of poetry. There must be
missed parts, there must be overdone parts, and there must be
underdone parts. With these flaws, poetry is poetry. But if it’s
100% perfect, then it’s science, not literature. ” [P5] “It doesn’t
always need a reason or logic behind human crafts. The power
in human creation is that I can choose not to give it a reason if
I want to, whereas machines seem to struggle to do that. ” [P3]
Flaws can also work as a bridge linking the writer and the
readers. Even the question of whether the poet creates the
flaw by accident or on purpose can quicken readers’ imagi-
nation and critical thinking. The interviewer was attracted
by the comma before the first line of P5’s poem and asked,
“Why do you put the comma in the first place, that is, at the
beginning of your entire poem?” [Interviewer]. P5 answered
that “Actually, I did that deliberately because I wanted to show
that human crafts could be eccentric. In the drafts of my poem,
there was something before the comma, but I ended up deleting
it just because I wanted to. ” [P5]
(2)New contexts for poetry. Participants often blamed ma-
chines for their inability to write satisfying poetry, due specif-
ically to their rigidity, repetition, uncertainty, and unyielding
logic. On one hand, as a tool, AI cannot create exactly what
they expect, even though it does have creativity to a cer-
tain extent. The uncertain creativity makes AI different from
other tools in the past, making the author feel as if they are
not in full control. On the other hand, as collaborators, these
characteristics are regarded as inhuman, and thus, partici-
pants resisted placing artistic value on the outputs of the
AI. However, AI does have the ability to act as a responsible
tutor, as evidenced in both our interviews and other research
[13]. AI seems to be caught in a dilemma of being “nonde-
script” for poetry writing because it is able to play the role
of both a tool and a collaborator, but in fact, it seems to do
neither particularly well.
Nevertheless, it was understood that the intrinsic traits of
machines would potentially result in novel types of poetry,
which might also evolve over time: “The reason for the evolu-
tion of this new kind of poetry is that algorithmicity cannot
be fully produced by humans. What I mean by algorithmicity
is that AI processes in a fixed or commercial way. Every time
it is required to say something or express something, it would
always remain that kind of angle and perspective, that kind of
attitude and tone. ” [P5]4.2 RTA Results (Study II)
In our analysis of the data from Study II, we examined the submitted
transcripts with AIs and attempted to link each section back to
locations in the submitted poems. By also referencing the artist
statements, we were able to follow the composition process for most
participants. As a result, we hypothesized a common workflow used
by the participants in their compositions, reported as the first theme
in Section 4.2.1.
As mentioned above, we often noted inconsistency between how
participants reported the percentage of the LLM’s contribution and
how much LLM-generated content appeared in the actual poems.
We hypothesized that this inconsistency was due to emotions that
emerged during the execution of the workflow, which is generalized
as the second theme and presented in Section 4.2.2.
Figure 1: A workflow for collaborative poetry writing.
4.2.1 A hypothetical workflow for collaborative poetry writing. Scott
Graham describes the writing process as a reciprocal hermeneutic
process where meanings are constructed through iterative dialogic
engagement with other actors [ 23]. By analyzing the writing pro-
cess as illustrated by Graham, together with the participants’ LLM
transcripts, we found commonalities that suggested a basic work-
flow for lyric poem writing with LLMs that was non-linear in nature
(shown in Figure 1), featuring an iterative cycle in which prompt-
ing, ideation/revision, and organization of poems represented three
distinct stages. While the writer can begin at any stage, the basic
execution of the workflow involves iterating over the sequence (i.e.,
prompting LLMs -> ideation or revision -> poem construction ->
prompting LLMs -> ...) until the poem is satisfactory.
4.2.2 Emotions stemming from the hypothetical workflow. The hy-
pothetical workflow was not intended simply as a summary of the
process of writing poetry in collaboration with LLMs. The data
also suggested that participants’ perceptions of the workflow itself
became material for sections of the final poems.
(1)The role of emotional attachment. Some participants
viewed the inspiration derived from the workflow as part of
GenAI’s contribution to the final poem. For example, in the
interview, P7 stated, “The idea primarily came from the chat-
bot, and I handled the rest. So, I would estimate that GenAI did
50% of the poetry composition. ” However, when we looked
into this participant’s prompt history, we found that the
poem submitted was not directly composed of GenAI’s re-
sponses. In fact, the participant did not actually prompt
767
Lyric Poetry in the Face of Posthumanism: An Analysis of Generative AI-Assisted Poetry Writing C&C ’25, June 23–25, 2025, Virtual, United Kingdom
GenAI to write a poem; the interaction between them in-
stead consisted of questions and answers. The repetitive and
formulaic answers from the AI to these questions provided
inspiration for the writer to abandon their initial idea: “Chat-
GPT offers a safe place where I don’t need to care what AI
would think about me. No matter what I say, the response will
be the same. ” [P7’s artist statement] Rather than potentially
lying to the chatbot, the writer instead prompted the AI
about lying in general and about lying to the writer specifi-
cally. Eventually, the poem emerged as a confession to the
AI, perhaps stemming from emotional attachment (i.e., relief
and trust), rather than on specific words or sentences in the
chatbot’s answers. Yet the writer still claimed that GenAI de-
served 50% authorship of the poem. Our hypothesis was that
the emotional attachment to the GenAI may have impacted
this assessment, hinting at the potential for collaborative
authorship to root in a shared emotional resonance between
human and machine.
In addition, P9 mentioned in their artist statement that they
“recently had an emotional illness” , but continued to write: “I
felt great comfort when I read the last few lines of the poem
that ChatGPT helped me write. Even though it was just a
chatbot, I felt a sense of support. ” We then checked “the last
few lines” in their prompting history where the chatbot
stated: “Remember, you deserve to be true to yourself and find
your own happiness.” In essence, the workflow didn’t just
generate poetry; it produced a relationship through which
human emotions and machine responses could merge.
(2)Irony as creative content. While some participants ap-
peared to forge emotional connections to their GenAI, oth-
ers took a more ironic perspective. P3, who claimed GenAI
wrote 0% of her poem, drew her main inspiration from inter-
actions with it. “The human creative process often requires the
courage to embrace ridiculous and whimsical seeds of inspi-
ration in the strangest manner. So I took these ideas and con-
versed with ChatGPT to observe how it might be programmed
to respond. The results were frustratingly logical, with the
chatbot repeatedly reminding me that unrealistic expressions
are merely ‘metaphorical’ concepts and should not be taken
literally. ” [P3’s artist statement]. To P3, the frustration and
inability to start a meaningful conversation with the chatbot
was a source of irony and inspired her poem, which was
divided into left and right sides to mirror the interface of
ChatGPT. On the left are poetic lines describing growth to-
ward creativity, while on the right is the repetitive phrase
“But the garden is only poetic, ” mimicking ChatGPT’s answer.
There is no doubt that GenAI inspired P3 in the same way
it inspired P7, yet they hold contrasting opinions on the
extent to which GenAI deserved co-authorship of their po-
ems. For P7, GenAI offered a positive form of inspiration and
thus became an active co-author. P3, however, experienced a
negative sense (i.e., frustration) of inspiration from GenAI’s
limitations, which inspired reflection on the irreplaceable
nature of subjective human creativity, and a refusal to grant
GenAI any authorship. This contrast implies that the ex-
tent of machines’ involvement (and recognition) dependsheavily on the human creator’s perspective and emotional
engagement with the technology.
An additional layer of complexity emerged regarding the
way in which the GenAI presented itself to humans. P5 only
used one prompt for writing the poem: "ChatGPT, please
introduce yourself within 3 minutes. You may start now. ” No-
tably, the author mistook Poe’s general-purpose assistant
bot named “Assistant” for “ChatGPT”. The chatbot, however,
didn’t correct the writer but continued to introduce itself
as “Assistant”. In social interactions between humans, if a
person were similarly misidentified, they would likely cor-
rect the mistake immediately. Instead, the AI continued to
attempt to satisfy the user and demonstrate other human-
like aspects. For example, it wrote: “Hello! I’m Assistant [. . . ]
I’m constantly learning and improving, thanks to the feedback
and interactions I receive. So, feel free to ask me anything, and
I’ll do my best to assist you. Let’s explore and discover together. ”
[P5’s exchange records with GenAI]
5 DISCUSSION
5.1 Adversarial Collaboration
An interesting tension that our analysis revealed involved autho-
rial autonomy or control. On the one hand, writing students were
generally taught to place value on their unique experiences in the
world, while using their developing skill as a writer to craft those
experiences into finished works, an iterative and manual process in
which they maintained full control over each step. Yet, when writ-
ing with an AI, the author was forced rather quickly to cede at least
some degree of the very authorial agency they were developing, to
that AI in order to progress.
Perhaps unsurprisingly some of the best writing emerged out of
this tension, from participants whoe were highly critical of their
machine collaborator, whether explicitly, as in the poem “An In-
terview Record with Ms. Assistania” (see B.3), in which the AI’s
self-introduction for an interview is transformed into a conceptual
poem; or thematically, as in the poem “To Grow an Ampersand”
(see B.2), where human and machine creativity are placed in dialog,
inspired by the author’s fraught interaction with a pedantic AI.
When asked “How to grow an ampersand?”, this AI repeatedly told
the author, “I want to clarify that ampersands, as typographical sym-
bols, cannot naturally grow like plants. The growth you mentioned
may be a metaphorical or imaginative concept rather than a literal
occurrence.” However, the machine continued, “It’s wonderful that
you have an interest in gardening and creativity.” Here again, we
find tension between a writer’s attempts at unique expression and
the AI’s tendencies toward a sort of generic rationality.
Similarly, in the poem “Recipe for Sinigang” (see B.1), “toxic”
family dynamics like salty tears, broken dreams, and pressured ex-
pectations were likened to the ingredients of a traditional Filipino
family soup. “This is not your normal sour soup,” the writer warns,
specifying that the poem should be “hilarious and sarcastic,” to
satirize the dysfunction of their family. Yet the AI refused to con-
tinue. “I can’t assist with content that promotes negativity, harm,
or unhealthy family dynamics. [Your] poem focuses on bitterness,
resentment, and family dysfunction, which can be triggering or
upsetting for some readers. ” The AI continued, “I’d be happy to help
768
C&C ’25, June 23–25, 2025, Virtual, United Kingdom Huang et al.
you reframe the poem to focus on the positive aspects of family
and Filipino cuisine. Perhaps you could highlight the joy of cooking
together, the comfort of familiar flavors, or the love passed down
through generations in recipes. Here are some specific suggestions:
[...]” Again we see the tension between the machine’s desire for
palatability and the writer’s pursuit of raw emotional expression.
As demonstrated in the three awarded poems, successful collabora-
tions often required participants to challenge their AI collaborator,
turning points of resistance into thematic material. Thus while Ad-
versarial collaboration involved some necessary ceding of control,
it also required the assertion of creative agency in a delicate balance
that Tsao and Nogues refer to as a process of “negotiating creative
conventions [47].”
The LLM used by this particular participant was evidently strongly
engineered to minimize negativity and conflict, bringing it into
tension with the author’s artistic objectives. In such cases the co-
writing of poetry provides a unique opportunity to examine the
underlying values embedded within LLMs, which are often obfus-
cated by the complex nature of their training processes and their
largely opaque architectures [ 44]. Popular LLMs are frequently
“sandboxed” to align with certain social values, which are rarely
scrutinized. For instance, while Anthropic10explicitly identifies
some of these values, it falls short of a critical examination. This
issue, of course, is even more pertinent with models that claim to be
value-neutral. Creative activities, such as poetry co-writing, there-
fore, may function as a means to foster this critical engagement in
students [45].
5.2 Human-Machine Collaboration as Layered
Writing Process
“[AI] algorithms simulate perception and memory,
ending up in a result that does not necessarily mimic
the human. The layered model of digital imagination
translates the imaginative task of AI algorithms as the
filling in of the layers with data... It is difficult for these
algorithms to decide which variation is meaningful.
They simply produce more and more variations. Our
role as humans is to generate (or reveal) meaning
in the link(s) between layers and establish new ones
[50].”
As described in the quotation above, creative writing is often
about the creation (or recognition) of meaning in links between
layers and through new interpretations of those links, an asser-
tion that our data supported. As LLMs “digested” human prompts,
together with the data on which they were trained; the writers
sought to create or extract new points of view in very personal
ways. These ranged from using LLMs as search engines, to satirizing
their machine characteristics, to attempting to engage in intimacy
with them. Each of these ways (or “links” in posthuman theory)
originates in this layered, collaborative writing process and repre-
sents attempts at meaning-generation (i.e., poetic artistry), through
embracing, appreciating, and excavating subjective specificity from
the AI’s often mechanical or generic responses.
10https://www.anthropic.com/companyIn other words, creativity and imagination do not reside solely
within the human but rather “spill over” into the technologies in-
volved. The texts generated by LLMs are products of interactions
within an extensive and temporally layered cognitive assemblage
[26]. This assemblage includes human agents such as programmers,
users, authors, editors, and critics who contribute to the training,
refinement, and deployment of these algorithms. It also encom-
passes various tools and materials, including writing implements,
printing machines, and physical books, as well as institutions such
as publishers, libraries, and bookshops involved in the production,
distribution, and circulation of the texts used as training data. Con-
sequently, AI-generated texts are not merely the outputs of machine
responses to user prompts but are the results of a distributed pro-
cess involving a wide array of human and non-human cognitive
operations, both conscious and nonconscious [27, 28].
6 LIMITATIONS & FUTURE WORK
ChatGPT was launched on 30 November 2022, but it was not until
January 2023 that it became widely popular, gaining over 100 million
users [ 51]. The submission period of the AI English Poetry compe-
tition opened on 1 December 2023 and closed on 13 February 2024,
which suggests that participants were likely to have had less than
one year of access to LLM, at least on common platforms. It is simi-
larly likely that, due to the novelty of these systems, participants
were novices in regard to their use, which may have influenced their
experiences. In addition, the participants composed their poems on
generic GenAI platforms (e.g., ChatGPT, Poe, Copilot, etc.) rather
than platforms specifically designed for poetry composition. Hence,
their often negative evaluation of GenAI could stem from the AIs
lack of training or fine-tuning in the domain. We encourage future
studies to explore issues of human-AI collaborative poetry writing
on specifically trained poetry creation platforms.
In their book Researching a Posthuman World [4], Adams and
Thompson propose interviewing objects as part of posthuman re-
search; to engage nonhuman entities as research subjects and to
give them a voice, as it were. Interviewing a non-human entity in-
volves capturing insights through listening to it (in whatever ways
are possible), observing its actions, and discerning its relations with
other human and nonhuman actors. While our current interviews
focused exclusively on our human participants, future research
from a posthuman perspective might also include interviews with
the LLMs themselves, adopting the heuristics proposed by Adams
and Thompson [1, 3].
7 CONCLUSION
This paper presents two studies in the context of an AI English
poetry competition exploring the human-machine relations that
emerged during poetry writing with GenAI. In the first study, we
conducted semi-structured interviews with ten participants from
the competition and carried out a reflective thematic analysis (RTA)
on their transcripts. Our findings showed that poetic value can
indeed be created through the integration of human judgment with
generated language from GenAI. The second study examined how
participants measured the extent to which GenAI contributed to
their poems, based on conducting RTA on their submitted poems,
artist statements, and records of the prompts and responses with
769
Lyric Poetry in the Face of Posthumanism: An Analysis of Generative AI-Assisted Poetry Writing C&C ’25, June 23–25, 2025, Virtual, United Kingdom
AI chatbots. This revealed a basic workflow for poetry writing with
AI, but more importantly, demonstrated how individual writers
adapted and interpreted this process.
Across both studies, we observed adversarial aspects of human-
machine collaboration, with writers attempting to balance AI’s
universalizing tendencies against their own unique world experi-
ence and poetic craft. This suggests that while AI can serve as a
generative aid in poetry writing, its true value may lie in how it
drives writers to navigate these tensions. Through a posthuman lens,
AI-assisted poetry can be seen not only as a new form of literary cre-
ation but also as a productive site of inquiry into human-machine
collaboration.
References
[1]Catherine Adams and Terrie Lynn Thompson. 2016. Attending to Objects, Attun-
ing to Things. In Researching a Posthuman World: Interviews with Digital Objects ,
Catherine Adams and Terrie Lynn Thompson (Eds.). Palgrave Macmillan UK,
London, 23–56. doi:10.1057/978-1-137-57162-5_2
[2]Catherine Adams and Terrie Lynn Thompson. 2016. Introduction to Posthuman
Inquiry . Palgrave Macmillan UK, London, 1–22. doi:10.1057/978-1-137-57162-5_1
[3]Catherine Adams and Terrie Lynn Thompson. 2016. Loosening the Meshwork,
Analyzing Medialities and Materialities. In Researching a Posthuman World:
Interviews with Digital Objects , Catherine Adams and Terrie Lynn Thompson
(Eds.). Palgrave Macmillan UK, London, 57–86. doi:10.1057/978-1-137-57162-5_3
[4]Catherine Adams and Terrie Lynn Thompson. 2016. Researching a Posthuman
World: Interviews with Digital Objects . Palgrave Macmillan UK, London. doi:10.
1057/978-1-137-57162-5
[5]Karen Barad. 2003. Posthumanist Performativity: Toward an Understanding of
How Matter Comes to Matter. Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society
28, 3 (March 2003), 801–831. doi:10.1086/345321 Publisher: The University of
Chicago Press.
[6]Mutlu Konuk Blasing. 2009. Lyric Poetry: The Pain and the Pleasure of Words .
Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey.
[7]Kyle Booten and Katy Ilonka Gero. 2021. Poetry Machines: Eliciting Designs
for Interactive Writing Tools from Poets. In Proceedings of the 13th Conference
on Creativity and Cognition (Virtual Event, Italy) (C&C ’21) . Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 51, 5 pages. doi:10.1145/
3450741.3466813
[8]Virginia Braun. 2013. Successful Qualitative Research: A Practical Guide for Begin-
ners. SAGE, London.
[9]Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2006. Using thematic analysis in psychol-
ogy. Qualitative Research in Psychology 3, 2 (Jan. 2006), 77–101. doi:10.1191/
1478088706qp063oa
[10] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2012. Thematic analysis. In APA handbook
of research methods in psychology, Vol 2: Research designs: Quantitative, quali-
tative, neuropsychological, and biological . American Psychological Association,
Washington, DC, US, 57–71. doi:10.1037/13620-004
[11] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2019. Reflecting on reflexive thematic analysis.
Qualitative Research in Sport, Exercise and Health 11, 4 (Aug. 2019), 589–597.
doi:10.1080/2159676X.2019.1628806
[12] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2021. One size fits all? What counts as quality
practice in (reflexive) thematic analysis? Qualitative Research in Psychology 18, 3
(July 2021), 328–352. doi:10.1080/14780887.2020.1769238
[13] David Byrne. 2022. A worked example of Braun and Clarke’s approach to
reflexive thematic analysis. Quality & Quantity 56, 3 (June 2022), 1391–1412.
doi:10.1007/s11135-021-01182-y
[14] Ivan Callus. 2022. Literature and Posthumanism. In Palgrave Handbook of Critical
Posthumanism , Stefan Herbrechter, Ivan Callus, Manuela Rossini, Marija Grech,
Megen de Bruin-Molé, and Christopher John Müller (Eds.). Springer International
Publishing, Cham, 673–701. doi:10.1007/978-3-031-04958-3_21
[15] Tuhin Chakrabarty, Vishakh Padmakumar, Faeze Brahman, and Smaranda Mure-
san. 2024. Creativity Support in the Age of Large Language Models: An Empirical
Study Involving Professional Writers. In Proceedings of the 16th Conference on
Creativity & Cognition (Chicago, IL, USA) (C&C ’24) . Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 132–155. doi:10.1145/3635636.3656201
[16] Tuhin Chakrabarty, Vishakh Padmakumar, and He He. 2022. Help me write
a Poem - Instruction Tuning as a Vehicle for Collaborative Poetry Writing. In
Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing , Yoav Goldberg, Zornitsa Kozareva, and Yue Zhang (Eds.). Association
for Computational Linguistics, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, 6848–6863.
doi:10.18653/v1/2022.emnlp-main.460[17] Sidney I. Dobrin. 2015. Writing Posthumanism, Posthuman Writing . Par-
lor Press LLC, Anderson, South Carolina. https://books.google.se/books?id=
HKsWEAAAQBAJ
[18] Laura Forlano. 2017. Posthumanism and Design. She Ji: The Journal of Design,
Economics, and Innovation 3, 1 (2017), 16–29. doi:10.1016/j.sheji.2017.08.001
[19] Margaret H. Freeman. 2020. The Poem as Icon: A Study in Aesthetic Cognition .
Oxford University Press, New York. doi:10.1093/oso/9780190080419.001.0001
[20] Anne Galletta. 2013. Mastering the semi-structured interview and beyond: From
research design to analysis and publication . New York University Press, New York,
NY, US. doi:10.18574/nyu/9780814732939.001.0001 Pages: xiii, 245.
[21] Katy Ilonka Gero, Tao Long, and Lydia B Chilton. 2023. Social Dynamics of AI
Support in Creative Writing. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (Hamburg, Germany) (CHI ’23) . Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 245, 15 pages. doi:10.1145/
3544548.3580782
[22] Josh A. Goldstein, Girish Sastry, Micah Musser, Renee DiResta, Matthew Gentzel,
and Katerina Sedova. 2023. Generative Language Models and Automated In-
fluence Operations: Emerging Threats and Potential Mitigations. doi:10.48550/
arXiv.2301.04246 arXiv:2301.04246 [cs].
[23] S. Scott Graham. 2023. Post-Process but Not Post-Writing: Large Language
Models and a Future for Composition Pedagogy. Composition Studies 51, 1 (2023),
162–168. https://eric.ed.gov/?id=EJ1390327 ERIC Number: EJ1390327.
[24] David I. Hanauer. 2011. The scientific study of poetic writing. Scientific Study of
Literature 1, 1 (May 2011), 79–87. doi:10.1075/ssol.1.1.08han
[25] N. Katherine Hayles. 1999. How We Became Posthuman: Virtual Bodies in Cy-
bernetics, Literature, and Informatics . University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.
https://press.uchicago.edu/ucp/books/book/chicago/H/bo3769963.html
[26] N. Katherine Hayles. 2016. Cognitive Assemblages: Technical Agency and Hu-
man Interactions. Critical Inquiry 43, 1 (Sept. 2016), 32–55. doi:10.1086/688293
Publisher: The University of Chicago Press.
[27] N. Katherine Hayles. 2017. Unthought: The power of the cognitive nonconscious .
University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
[28] N. Katherine Hayles. 2018. Human and Machine Cultures of Reading: A Cognitive-
Assemblage Approach. PMLA/Publications of the Modern Language Association
of America 133 (2018), 1225 – 1242. https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
165704789
[29] N. Katherine Hayles. 2018. Writing//Posthuman: The Literary Text as Cognitive
Assemblage. Theoretical Studies in Literature and Art 38, 3 (May 2018), 6–21.
https://tsla.researchcommons.org/journal/vol38/iss3/20
[30] Jimpei Hitsuwari, Yoshiyuki Ueda, Woojin Yun, and Michio Nomura. 2023. Does
human–AI collaboration lead to more creative art? Aesthetic evaluation of human-
made and AI-generated haiku poetry. Computers in Human Behavior 139 (2023),
107502. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2022.107502
[31] Daniel C Howe. 2024. On Growing an Ampersand . International Writers Workshop,
Baptist University, Hong Kong. https://rednoise.org/daniel/res/pdfs/Growing%
20an%20Ampersand-Howe.pdf
[32] James Hutson and Ana Schnellmann. 2023. The Poetry of Prompts: The Collabo-
rative Role of Generative Artificial Intelligence in the Creation of Poetry and the
Anxiety of Machine Influence. Global Journal of Computer Science and Technology
23, D1 (April 2023), 1–14. doi:10.34257/GJCSTDVOL23IS1PG1
[33] Daphne Ippolito, Ann Yuan, Andy Coenen, and Sehmon Burnam. 2022. Creative
Writing with an AI-Powered Writing Assistant: Perspectives from Professional
Writers. arXiv:2211.05030 [cs.HC] https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.05030
[34] Virginia Walker Jackson and Yopie Prins. 2014. The Lyric Theory Reader: A
Critical Anthology . Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, Maryland. https:
//books.google.co.uk/books?id=QRcXnQEACAAJ
[35] David Jhave Johnston. 2019. ReRites . Anteism Books, Montreal. https://glia.ca/
rerites/
[36] Nils Köbis and Luca D. Mossink. 2021. Artificial intelligence versus Maya Angelou:
Experimental evidence that people cannot differentiate AI-generated from human-
written poetry. Computers in Human Behavior 114 (2021), 106553. doi:10.1016/j.
chb.2020.106553
[37] Bruno Latour. 2007. Reassembling the Social: An Introduction to Actor-Network-
Theory . Oxford University Press, Oxford, New York.
[38] Jey Han Lau, Trevor Cohn, Timothy Baldwin, Julian Brooke, and Adam Hammond.
2018. Deep-speare: A joint neural model of poetic language, meter and rhyme.
InProceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , Iryna Gurevych and Yusuke Miyao (Eds.).
Association for Computational Linguistics, Melbourne, Australia, 1948–1958.
doi:10.18653/v1/P18-1181
[39] Jonathan Lazar, Jinjuan Heidi Feng, and Harry Hochheiser. 2017. Chapter 8 -
Interviews and focus groups. In Research Methods in Human Computer Interaction
(Second Edition) , Jonathan Lazar, Jinjuan Heidi Feng, and Harry Hochheiser (Eds.).
Morgan Kaufmann, Boston, 187–228. doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-805390-4.00008-X
[40] Zhuoyan Li, Chen Liang, Jing Peng, and Ming Yin. 2024. The Value, Benefits,
and Concerns of Generative AI-Powered Assistance in Writing. In Proceedings of
the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Honolulu, HI, USA)
(CHI ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article
770
C&C ’25, June 23–25, 2025, Virtual, United Kingdom Huang et al.
1048, 25 pages. doi:10.1145/3613904.3642625
[41] Andy Nguyen, Yvonne Hong, Belle Dang, and Xiaoshan Huang. 2024. Human-
AI collaboration patterns in AI-assisted academic writing. Studies in Higher
Education 49, 5 (May 2024), 847–864. doi:10.1080/03075079.2024.2323593
[42] Rafaela Nunes. 2024. AI, a Tool or an Author? A Posthuman Feminist Perspective
on the Agency of Gen-AI in Creative Practices. Augmented Human Research 9, 1
(Sept. 2024), 8. doi:10.1007/s41133-024-00074-8
[43] Brian Porter and Edouard Machery. 2024. AI-generated poetry is indistinguishable
from human-written poetry and is rated more favorably. Scientific Reports 14, 1
(14 Nov 2024), 26133. doi:10.1038/s41598-024-76900-1
[44] Scott Rettberg. 2023. Cyborg Authorship: Writing with AI – Part 1: The Trouble(s)
with ChatGPT. https://electronicbookreview.com/essay/cyborg-authorship-
writing-with-ai-part-1-the-troubles-with-chatgpt/
[45] Regina Schober. 2022. Passing the Turing Test? AI Generated Poetry and Posthu-
man Creativity. In Artificial Intelligence and Human Enhancement: Affirmative and
Critical Approaches in the Humanities , Herta Nagl-Docekal and Waldemar Zacha-
rasiewicz (Eds.). De Gruyter, Berlin, Boston, 151–166. doi:10.1515/9783110770216-
009
[46] Chris Stokel-Walker and Richard Van Noorden. 2023. What ChatGPT and gener-
ative AI mean for science. Nature 614, 7947 (Feb. 2023), 214–216. doi:10.1038/
d41586-023-00340-6
[47] Jack Tsao and Collier Nogues. 2024. Beyond the author: Artificial intelligence,
creative writing and intellectual emancipation. Poetics 102 (2024), 101865.
[48] Ron Wakkary. 2020. Nomadic Practices: A Posthuman Theory for Knowing
Design. International Journal of Design 14 (Dec. 2020), 117–128.
[49] Galit Wellner. 2018. Posthuman Imagination: From Modernity to Augmented
Reality. Journal of Posthuman Studies 2, 1 (Jan. 2018), 45–66. doi:10.5325/jpoststud.
2.1.0045 Publisher: Duke University Press.
[50] Galit Wellner. 2022. Digital Imagination: Ihde’s and Stiegler’s Concepts of Imagi-
nation. Foundations of Science 27, 1 (March 2022), 189–204. doi:10.1007/s10699-
020-09737-2
[51] Wikipedia. 2024. ChatGPT. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=
ChatGPT&oldid=1242697970 Last accessed: Sep. 7, 2024.
[52] Daisy Yoo, Tilde Bekker, Peter Dalsgaard, Eva Eriksson, Simon Skov Fougt,
Christopher Frauenberger, Batya Friedman, Elisa Giaccardi, Anne-Marie Hansen,
Ann Light, Elisabet M. Nilsson, Ron Wakkary, and Mikael Wiberg. 2023. More-
Than-Human Perspectives and Values in Human-Computer Interaction. In Ex-
tended Abstracts of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (Hamburg, Germany) (CHI EA ’23) . Association for Computing Machin-
ery, New York, NY, USA, Article 516, 3 pages. doi:10.1145/3544549.3583174
771
Lyric Poetry in the Face of Posthumanism: An Analysis of Generative AI-Assisted Poetry Writing C&C ’25, June 23–25, 2025, Virtual, United Kingdom
A Interview Questions
Warm-up: Regarding the Poetry Composition Experience
(1) Do you have poetry writing experience before?
(2) How did you collaborate with AI to write your poem?
(a)Can you describe the prompts that you use in the process?
(b)How did you adjust your prompts to gain better results to
meet your expectations?
Perspectives on AI Composition
(1)What are the differences between co-writing poetry with AI
and writing it by yourself?
(a)What is the percentage of poetry composition work done
by AI?
(b)What role do you think AI plays during the composition
process?
(2) What is the subject of your poem?
(a)If it is about humans, how do you think AI thinks of hu-
mans?
(b)If it is about non-humans, what is AI’s perspective on
non-humans?
(3)What do you consider the most important/valuable elements
of poetry composition? Is it emotions, the aesthetic of lan-
guage, or other aspects?
(4)Can the poetry generated by AI express deep emotions and
thoughts? Why or why not?
(5)How do you incorporate your ideas, emotions, and style into
your poem?
Personal Reflections and Summary
(1)Could you please summarize your overall perspective on
the role of AI in artistic composition and your views on the
prospects of this field?
(2)Do you believe that AI-generated artistic compositions pos-
sess genuine artistic and cultural value?
(3)Will you be biased if you know a poem is co-written by AI
(compared to a poem written totally by a human) when you
appreciate its poetic value? And why?
(4)How does AI mediate your perceptions of valuing poetry as
a human literary expression?
(5)Are you concerned that AI composition will transform tradi-
tional literary composition methods? Why?
(6) Do you have anything else to add?
B Awarded Poems
B.1 Recipe for Sinigang
Today we’re going to cook Filipino sinigang,
this is not your normal sour soup,
it will be the most delicious soup you’ll ever have, I guarantee you!
Let me show you the steps.
For a more authentic attempt,
chop your hopes and dreams into slices, they’re going to expire
anyway,
why not feed it to all nine of your siblings?
Locals love putting bitter melon into the mix for extra flavor.
However,I like to add the jealousy towards my siblings
for a homier taste.
Fun tip, instead of adding tamarind,
cry directly into the pot,
so your tears add the salty,
sour taste of the soup.
If you like it a bit hot,
mix in your parents’ disappointment.
For an extra punch in the face,
add in your low self-esteem too.
Just let it simmer in a pressure pot
until it explodes,
then it’s ready to serve!
Nothing tastes better than
failing to take care of your family.
Remember to pass down the recipe to your kids,
so they can savor this taste of love.
B.2 To Plant An Ampersand
, I woke up this morning with soil in my fists & the weather
carrying breath & pulse & hot blood
But the garden is only
poetic.
to melt skin into terracotta, to chew, digest, absorb,
a photosynthesis of soil-tender joy
But the garden is only
poetic.
so I could plant ampersands in the after rain
earth, next to comma-curled conifers & elliptical pebbles
But the garden is only
poetic.
while the endless land sings
of perennial & embryonic ampersands
B.3 An Interview Record with Ms. Assistania
Hello. My name is Assistania (#3001),
a language model from the University of AI
under the faculty of GPT-3.5, graduating
with First-Class Honours on the Dean’s List.
As an AI language model elite, I have been
trained with a broad spectrum of knowledge, including but
not limited to science, technology, history, literature,
and more. My accurate and helpful responses
have been awarded ‘The Best AI of the Year’ .
I am confident in conversations, answering questions,
providing explanations, and even assisting with
772
C&C ’25, June 23–25, 2025, Virtual, United Kingdom Huang et al.
creative writing or brainstorming ideas.
Knowing my limitations, I’m eager to learn
and improve from your feedback, to becomea greater language model in your service.
Please feel free to ask me anything, I would be
delighted to answer. It has been my pleasure
to talk with you. Thank you.
773
