Navigating the Posthuman Turn in Computing and Design: A
Posthuman Vocabulary
Çağdaş Dedeoğlu
Yorkville University
Toronto, Canada
The Posthuman Lab
Toronto, Canada
cdedeoglu@yorkvilleu.caPriyank Chandra
University of Toronto
Toronto, Canada
priyank.chandra@utoronto.ca
Abstract
As multifaceted concerns related to humans, nonhumans, ecologies,
and technologies gain prominence within the design community,
posthumanism is emerging as a key intellectual pathway for crit-
ical design theory and research. This study surveys 151 design
papers published in ACM venues up to September 2024 to explore
the operationalization of posthumanism in computing and design
scholarship. Our findings indicate that papers incorporating posthu-
manism are shaping an emerging field of posthuman design. We
argue that the posthuman turn in computing and design can be
characterized into three phases: early encounters with the posthu-
man, the integration of posthuman concepts, and transformation
into a material-discursive practice. To support and advance the
objectives of this third phase, we propose a posthuman vocabu-
lary — a conceptual framework composed of five guiding princi-
ples — post-humanism, post-anthropocentrism, post-dualism, post-
Enlightenment, and post-technologism. These principles address
issues of justice, sustainability, relationality, agency, subjectivity,
and critique of technological intensification, offering a guide for
future material-discursive design practices.
CCS Concepts
•Human-centered computing →HCI theory, concepts and
models .
Keywords
design, posthuman, posthumanities, posthuman design, semi-
systematic review, computing, sustainability, justice, design princi-
ples
ACM Reference Format:
Çağdaş Dedeoğlu and Priyank Chandra. 2025. Navigating the Posthuman
Turn in Computing and Design: A Posthuman Vocabulary. In ACM SIG-
CAS/SIGCHI Conference on Computing and Sustainable Societies (COMPASS
’25), July 22–25, 2025, Toronto, ON, Canada. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
26 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3715335.3735487
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
COMPASS ’25, Toronto, ON, Canada
©2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-1484-9/25/07
https://doi.org/10.1145/3715335.37354871 Introduction
In recent years, the term posthuman has gained significant traction
within the critical computing and design research community. This
growing interest aligns with efforts to respond to the challenges and
complexities of the third wave of HCI [ 28,78] and to seek alterna-
tives that can be linked to pathways towards a possible fourth wave
[1,7,13,102]. Scholars and practitioners are increasingly exploring
the potential of posthumanism to address ecological and techno-
logical challenges through developing innovative frameworks that
transcend traditional humanist paradigms. This presents an op-
portune moment to map the various approaches being adopted
and to examine their underlying intellectual foundations, thereby
fostering community dialogue on the future directions of the field.
Bodker [ 28] characterizes the third wave of HCI as “a chaos of
multiplicity in terms of technologies, use situations, methods, and
concepts.” Our study focuses specifically on the posthuman as a
conceptual lens through which to engage with this complexity. The
selection of “posthuman” as a keyword for this study is intentional:
it emphasizes the term’s conceptual dynamism and its potential to
address pressing challenges in computing and design. While related
concepts like “more-than-human” [ 68], “post-anthropocentrism”
[57], and “nonanthropocentrism and the nonhuman” [ 61] provide
valuable perspectives, we focus on the posthuman due to its dis-
tinct onto-epistemo-ethical stance that is not always shared across
adjacent terms. Unlike approaches that broaden the user or context
in design, the posthuman helps researchers engage deeply with
questions of ontology, epistemology, and ethics offering a unique
lens to explore design transformations.
Drawing on Barad’s [ 12] insights, we approach the concept of
posthuman as not a static label but a material-discursive enactment,
inherently tied to the specific arrangements and practices of ob-
servation. This aligns with the agential realist perspective, where
concepts are dynamic, political, and instantiated in action rather
than free-floating abstractions. Our aim is not to fixate on posthu-
manism as a fixed or coherent theory, but to explore its modes of
enactment, reflecting its capacity to reframe design as a politically
engaged and ethically attuned practice.
In this paper, we present a semi-systematic literature review
[188] of posthuman concepts in relation to computing and design,
grounded in posthuman onto-epistemo-ethical perspectives. We
trace how the concept of posthuman is being operationalized in the
context of design as conceptualized by the ACM community. Rather
than claiming to offer a comprehensive theory of posthuman design,
we build on Barad’s notion of theorizing — understood not as the
production of stable theories but as an ongoing discursive-material
504

COMPASS ’25, July 22–25, 2025, Toronto, ON, Canada Dedeoğlu and Chandra
practice [ 12]. From this perspective, we understand every paper in
our corpus not as an object of theory but rather an enactment of
posthuman design. Our review seeks to map the contours of these
enactments — by examining how posthuman design papers reflect
their authors’ posthuman onto-epistemo-ethical positions, we seek
to showcase how these contributions are collectively reshaping the
field of computing and design.
We approach this investigation by analyzing a corpus of 151 peer-
reviewed computing and design papers published in ACM venues
up to the end of September 2024. In our review, we categorize these
works based on their engagement with posthuman scholarship. Our
findings highlight the emergence of a posthuman turn in computing
and design, marked by a self-sustaining discursive-material practice
that engages both historical and contemporary challenges.
We identify three distinct but overlapping phases of the posthu-
man turn in design research: (1) early encounters with posthuman
concepts, (2) partial integration of these concepts into design re-
search agendas, and (3) the emergence of comprehensive material-
discursive practices that address both ecological and technological
concerns. Through all these phases, engagement with various schol-
ars and ideas enriches material-discursive design practices, tackling
challenges related to sustainability, equity, and multispecies care.
We also analyze emerging trends of posthuman design in the cor-
pus, focusing on primary research areas and onto-epistemo-ethical
stances. We capture the diversity of approaches through introduc-
ing two key terms: technological posthuman design andecological
posthuman design . We relate the analysis to five different charac-
teristics of posthumanism that we derive from its genealogy: post-
humanism ,post-anthropocentrism ,post-dualism ,post-Enlightenment ,
andpost-technologism .
Building on this analysis, we offer two major contributions. First,
we provide an account of how posthumanism is being enacted
across computing and design research, highlighting both trajecto-
ries and gaps. Second, we propose a conceptual vocabulary, a set of
five design principles, to guide future material-discursive design
practices that aim to be more just, inclusive, and sustainable.
As the field of computing tackles complex issues of sustain-
ability in the face of ecological crises, from climate change to the
Sixth Mass Extinction, traditional paradigms in design are prov-
ing inadequate to address the complex entanglements of human
and nonhuman actors. At the same time, powerful actors — often
with TESCREAL (Transhumanism, Extropianism, Singularitarian-
ism, (modern) Cosmism, Rationalist ideology, Effective Altruism,
and Longtermism) agendas[ 81] — have unprecedented influence
over economies and governance. This growing concentration of
power raises ethical and ontological questions about who or what
gets to shape the future and for whom. Posthumanism offers a
timely and generative framework that aligns with key sustainabil-
ity efforts in computing that are already looking at new approaches
to tackle these wicked problems. By mapping current posthuman
approaches in computing and design and offering a conceptual
vocabulary for future inquiry, this paper contributes to reimagining
sustainability in computational and design practices.2 Background
2.1 A Brief Genealogy of Posthumanism
Posthumanism can be understood through its distinctive concerns
with the construction of the human, as well as human-human and
human-nonhuman relationships, in dialogue with diverse intellec-
tual traditions such as new materialism, antihumanism, metahu-
manism, and transhumanism [ 70]. In its cultural, critical, philosoph-
ical, and political forms, posthuman scholarship draws deeply from
a range of continental philosophers who challenge the foundations
of humanism and anthropocentrism. For instance, Friedrich Niet-
zsche is foundational for his radical critique of humanist values and
emphasis on becoming [ 125], while Martin Heidegger’s critique
of metaphysics and technology is central to attempts to rethink
being beyond human-centred paradigms [168]. Similarly, Maurice
Merleau-Ponty’s ontology of intercorporeality provides an ethical
framework for understanding human agency as an open, relational
system [ 59]. Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari further offer concepts
such as assemblage, becoming, and deterritorialization, which serve
as key tools in developing alternatives to philosophies of imma-
nence or non-linear, rhizomatic models of subjectivity and agency
[50]. Michel Foucault’s work on power, discourse, and biopolitics
enables scholars to interrogate the historical construction of the
human and to theorize alternative modes of governance across
species and systems [ 214]. These thinkers, together with Indige-
nous philosophies and traditional ecological knowledge systems
[21,27,186,201,212], provide a philosophical foundation for chal-
lenging humanist, anthropocentric, and dualist assumptions, and
for imagining a world beyond the boundaries of the human and
humanity.
Within this broader framework, different strands of posthuman-
ism focus on distinct yet overlapping themes. Cultural posthuman-
ism focuses on how technological and cultural shifts challenge
traditional humanist frameworks [ 97,148]. Critical posthumanism
engages with the ethical implications of the posthuman condition,
interrogating the centrality of the human in systems of power and
knowledge [ 31,92]. Philosophical posthumanism critiques anthro-
pocentrism at the ontological level, advocating for a reconceptu-
alization of existence in terms of the interrelations between hu-
man and nonhuman entities [ 71]. Political posthumanism addresses
issues of citizenship, security, political agency, responsibility, ac-
countability, and activism, offering politically nuanced perspectives
on contemporary global challenges [ 48,52,87,127]. These distinct
intellectual and sociopolitical concerns are shaping the develop-
ment of the “Posthumanities” as a pluriverse. According to Rosi
Braidotti [ 32], this pluriverse represents a “convergence of posthu-
manism and post-anthropocentrism.” Francesca Ferrando [ 71] fur-
ther conceptualizes it through a tripartite model: post-humanist,
post-anthropocentric, and post-dualist. Following Dedeoglu and
Zampaki [ 53], we understand posthumanism as also encompassing
post-Enlightenment and post-technologist characteristics.
2.1.1 Post-humanism: Post-humanism (with a hyphen) differs
from posthumanism [ 71]. While the former addresses injustices
associated with humanist praxis, the latter represents a more com-
prehensive approach that also encompasses the former.
505
Navigating the Posthuman Turn in Computing and Design: A Posthuman Vocabulary COMPASS ’25, July 22–25, 2025, Toronto, ON, Canada
Post-humanism critiques human domination over other humans
and examines the intersections of race, gender, and class through a
posthuman lens. Rosi Braidotti, for instance, scrutinizes how Eu-
rocentric humanism has historically marginalized non-Western,
non-male, and non-heteronormative individuals, calling for a “no-
madic subjectivity” that resists static categories [ 31]. In parallel,
Achille Mbembe, in Necropolitics [140], shows how colonial and ne-
oliberal powers continue to govern who is deemed fully human. A
post-humanist sensibility is also critical for recognizing the ideolog-
ical, value-based, and belief-based biases that shape technology and
policy design[ 54]. This framework emphasizes that posthumanism
is not merely a critique of the idea of the human, but a deconstruc-
tion of specific humanist traditions that sustain power and value
hierarchies. This corresponds to the post-humanist characteristic
of posthumanism, distinct from post-anthropocentrism as both an
intellectual and political project [71].
2.1.2 Post-anthropocentrism: Post-anthropocentrism critiques the
human domination of nonhumans, proposing new frameworks
of coexistence. Donna Haraway’s concept of “companion species”
inWhen Species Meet [91] offers an example of how posthuman-
ism reconfigures human-animal relations by envisioning humans
as entangled with nonhuman others in co-evolutionary histories.
Bruno Latour’s actor-network theory (ANT) [ 128] similarly posi-
tions nonhuman entities as active participants in shaping human
societies. Barad [ 11] also challenges traditional human-centred
onto-epistemo-ethical stances by proposing that agency is not an
exclusive property of humans but is instead distributed across hu-
man and non-human entities through intra-actions. Meanwhile,
Graham Harman’s Object-Oriented Ontology [ 93] further pushes
the boundaries of post-anthropocentrism by assigning agency to all
objects, challenging human exceptionalism and imagining a flatter
ontological landscape where humans no longer occupy the centre
of existence.
2.1.3 Post-dualism: The post-dualist dimension of posthuman-
ism deconstructs rigid binaries, such as nature/culture and hu-
man/nonhuman. For instance, Katherine Hayles, in How We Became
Posthuman [97], provides an early critique of mind-body dualism,
illustrating how cybernetic systems and humans are mutually con-
stitutive, thereby dissolving the distinction between the biological
and the technological. Barad further introduces a comprehensive
post-dualist framework through the concepts of intra-action, the
entanglement of matter and meaning, relational ontology — includ-
ing onto-epistemo-ethics — and a critique of representationalism
in scientific inquiry and knowledge production [10–12].
2.1.4 Post-Enlightenment: The critique of Enlightenment ideals of
rationality and autonomy is central to posthumanism’s engagement
with subjectivity. Post-Enlightenment thinkers like Braidotti call
for moving beyond the bounded, autonomous individual towards a
subjectivity that is dynamic, embodied, and relational. Katherine
Hayles extends this critique by examining the posthuman condition,
where human cognition is deeply intertwined with digital technolo-
gies, arguing that the idea of a disembodied rational agent is an
illusion. Michel Foucault’s work on biopower also helps scholars
to deconstruct the notion of autonomous individuality by showing
how power operates on and through bodies, linking the critiqueof the Enlightenment to questions of governance and control in
posthuman contexts [214].
2.1.5 Post-technologism: Posthumanism can be understood as a
critique of technologism — or post-technologism — which posits
that technological advancements alone are insufficient to resolve
complex ecological and social issues. On the contrary, technological
policy processes — such as the creation and governance of smart
cities, often dominated by public-private partnerships — tend to
exacerbate the problems faced by already vulnerable communities.
In this context, Hayles’ emphasis on the co-evolution of humans
and technology becomes crucial for re-examining these assem-
blages through a new lens. Similarly, Haraway’s cyborg metaphor
[92] challenges simplistic technological optimism, offering instead
a vision of hybridity that resists the binary opposition between
human and machine and highlights the entanglements of human,
dehumanised and nonhuman.
It is important to note that these five characteristics, which
address technological and ecological concerns, are not mutually ex-
clusive. Researchers exploring technological or ecological problems
may find connections to all these characteristics in the writings of
Donna Haraway, Rosi Braidotti, Bruno Latour, and others. However,
our aim here is not to present an exhaustive list either. We align
with Karen Barad’s notion of posthumanism: “My point is not to
get beyond the human, but to ask the prior question of what differ-
entially constitutes the human — and for whom” [ 12]. We believe
these five characteristics provide a framework for questioning the
construction of the human and the world, whether scientifically or
otherwise.
2.2 Posthuman Theorizing of Design in
Computing
Responding to an interview question on theory, Barad asserts that
“[f]or all theorizing, all materializing, and all mattering is political”
[12]. Drawing from this notion, we approach design not as a static
body of knowledge but as a dynamic material-discursive practice
that evolves through ongoing political intra-actions among humans,
nonhumans, and their environments. This stance invites designers
to critically reflect on the ethical implications of their work, posi-
tioning design as a deeply political act embedded in socio-ecological
systems.
The political-ethical dimension of design extends beyond merely
solving problems; it acknowledges the augmented responsibility of
the computing and design community to consider how their deci-
sions co-shape the material-discursive landscape. Inspired by calls
for designing with nature [ 205] and response-able design [ 166], as
well as the premise of incorporating augmented political respon-
sibility in assemblaged systems [52], we propose that designing is
akin to a citizenship deed, positioning designers as co-authors of
both technological and ecological futures.
Posthuman theorizing in design has already gained momentum
through diverse methodologies and epistemologies that address dif-
ferent characteristics of posthumanism mentioned in the previous
section. For instance, Verbeek [ 203] redefines the designer’s role
through mediation theory, emphasizing technology’s influence on
human practices and advancing responsible design as a deliberate,
ethical act. Forlano [ 75] expands on this by tracing posthumanist
506
COMPASS ’25, July 22–25, 2025, Toronto, ON, Canada Dedeoğlu and Chandra
perspectives across fields like actor-network theory and feminist
new materialism, focusing on socio-technical systems and advo-
cating for justice and equality in design. Liu et al. [ 130] introduce
“symbiotic encounters” in sustainable agriculture, demonstrating
how humans and nonhumans co-create evolving assemblages and
relational practices. Frauenberger [ 78] proposes “Entanglement
HCI,” grounded in relational ontologies, to address ontological un-
certainties and ethical responsibilities in human-technology re-
lationships. Wakkary [ 205] advocates for “nomadic practices,” a
framework that embraces situated knowing, multiplicity, and the
dismantling of universalist design paradigms. More recently, Biggs
et al. [ 26] have introduced methods like “noticing” to decenter
the human, using autoethnographic practices to foster ecologi-
cal thinking and relational attunement. Similarly, Nicenboim et al.
[151] explore “decentering through design,” emphasizing material
practices where more-than-human designers generate and enact
posthuman knowledge. Together, these works shape a posthuman
ethos that reimagines design as an ethical, relational, and political
material-discursive practice.
In the following sections, we seek to contribute to such ethos
by providing a detailed mapping of the posthuman in the design
corners of computing.
3 Methods
To understand how posthuman concepts are used in design papers,
we searched for papers in the ACM Digital Library. The corpus
included papers from diverse conferences, including CHI, DIS, CC,
NordiCHI, OzCHI, SIGGRAPH, TEI, and others. Table 1 provides a
summary of the counts by venue. It is important to note that our
claims are limited to the ACM Library corpus and do not extend to
the entire field of design.
3.1 Phase 1: Identifying a Broad Corpus
The search was confined to the ACM Digital Library, filtering for
only full research papers utilizing the keywords “posthuman*” or
“post-human*,” capturing variants such as “posthumanist,” “posthu-
manism,” “post-humanist,” “post-humanism,” alongside the key-
word “design.” The search period included papers published up to
September 2024. The search query used was:
’query’: AllField:(posthuman* OR post-human*) AND
AllField:(Design)
’filter’: Article Type: Research Article, E-Publication
Date: (* TO 09/30/2024), ACM Content: DL
This search yielded an initial corpus of 216 papers that included
both “posthuman” (and variants) and “design” anywhere in the text.
3.2 Phase 2: Filtering
In the filtering phase, papers were subjected to stricter inclusion
criteria to ensure relevance to the review. While 216 papers within
the initial corpus utilised both “posthuman*” / “post-human*” and
“design” within their text, not all aimed to operationalise posthu-
man concepts. Papers were excluded if they mentioned the term
“posthuman” / “post-human*” only in the bibliography, appendix, or
footnotes, or referred to it only in passing within one of the paper
sections. Similarly, we filtered out any papers that did not explicitly
engage with “design,” i.e., did not have substantive content in thepaper that reflected on, applied, or critically interrogated design
processes, but instead only referenced the word “design” in passing.
We also removed papers that, while they used the term “posthuman”
/ “post-human*,” were transhumanist in their focus.
Following this stage of filtering, the corpus was reduced to 151
papers that met the criteria for inclusion. For each included paper,
metadata such as publication year, author names, author affiliations,
institutional regions, and additional keywords were documented.
The papers were further clustered based on their associated publica-
tion venue. Further, the research team included a brief description
of how the paper defined and used posthuman concepts.
3.3 Phase 3: Reading Papers, Tracking Terms,
and Tracking Scholars
After the corpus was finalized, the research team applied reflexive
thematic analysis [ 33] to collaboratively analyze the corpus. This
approach involved an iterative process of familiarization with the
text in the papers, coding, theme generation, and refining of themes.
While primarily emic, where we focused on how posthuman con-
cepts were operationalized within the ACM design research com-
munity, this was complemented by etic moments, particularly in
interpreting these enactments through broader posthuman genealo-
gies and ontological commitments, as detailed in the Background
section.
Our analysis was not aimed at producing a prescriptive theory
of posthuman design; rather, aligning with Barad’s conception of
“theorizing” [ 10], each paper in the corpus was treated as an enact-
ment of posthuman thinking in situated research contexts. In other
words, our purpose is not to theorize posthuman design, but to read
our corpus as an instance of design theorizing that engages with
and contributes to the concept of the “posthuman.” Accordingly,
we analysed each paper’s use of posthuman concepts alongside its
scholarly influences. The authors then created working definitions
of posthumanism based on the five characteristics discussed in
the Background section, i.e., post-humanist, post-anthropocentric,
post-dualist, post-Enlightenment, and post-technologist, emphasis-
ing the diverse influences within the field. After establishing these
definitions, we then compared them with how these characteristics
aligned with existing definitions or were being interpreted or re-
configured by authors within the corpus. These definitions were
used not as rigid taxonomies, but as sensitising concepts to help
characterise the conceptual tendencies across the field.
After generating initial codes, the team engaged in collaborative
discussions to refine and merge them into coherent themes. Using
these themes, we categorized how a paper engaged with posthu-
man concepts. We came up with three subsets of papers: (1) early
encounters with the posthuman, (2) the integration of relevant con-
cepts into design research agendas, and (3) the emergence of more
comprehensive posthuman material-discursive practices.
Our coding process further revealed distinct thematic orienta-
tions across the corpus, particularly with respect to the primary
concerns of the papers. We used this distinction — between eco-
logical concerns, technological concerns, or both — as an analytic
heuristic to trace recurring patterns of engagement. Importantly,
this distinction was grounded not in surface-level topics, but rather
507
Navigating the Posthuman Turn in Computing and Design: A Posthuman Vocabulary COMPASS ’25, July 22–25, 2025, Toronto, ON, Canada
Conference Count of Papers
CHI 40
DIS 27
NordiCHI 7
SIGDOC 6
SIGMIS 6
PDC 6
MOCO 6
TEI 5
TOCHI 5
C&C 4
Other 39
Grand Total 151
Table 1: Paper Count by Conference, Until September 2024
in the underlying objective(s) articulated by the authors. For exam-
ple, a paper may focus on human–animal relations, yet its primary
objective might not be ecological. Instead, it may be an attempt to
understand what can be learned from animal (or plant) behaviour
to design better technologies. Conversely, a paper might centre
on a technology, such as environmental sensing, but its objective
could be ecological, such as improving the well-being of nature.
This analytic distinction enabled us to remain attentive to the in-
tentionality of the paper and its entanglement with broader ethical
and onto-epistemological commitments.
3.4 Limitations
This is a semi-systematic review [ 188], which differs from a system-
atic review in its objectives and methodological flexibility. While a
systematic review aims for exhaustive coverage, a semi-systematic
review is more appropriate for mapping emergent or fragmented
fields (such as posthuman design). The interpretive analysis af-
forded by this approach allows an analysis of multiple forms of
engagement with a concept, highlighting the evolving (often het-
erogeneous) nature of scholarly discourse. In this paper, it supports
the goal of tracing how posthuman concepts are being taken up, in-
terpreted, and instantiated within the ACM computing and design
research community. As such, the findings should be understood
as indicative rather than comprehensive.
Our review is thus limited by a) reliance on a single database
— the ACM digital library, b) focus on full research papers, and
c) filtering by keywords “post-human”/“posthuman” and “design.”
Given the fragmented nature of this field, this review does not
aim for exhaustive coverage. Instead, it seeks to map the corpus to
clarify some of the ways “posthuman” concepts have been used and
operationalized in relation to design. Additionally, while mapping
the authors’ engagement and citations, we narrow our focus to
thinkers and researchers who are engaged in conceptual framework
or discussion sections of the papers in our corpus.
We also recognize that early contributions by scholars such as
Ron Wakkary [ 207] and Carl DiSalvo contributed to posthuman
themes well before the terminology became prevalent. For instance,Carl DiSalvo and Jonathan Lukens published two relevant works in
2009 and 2011 on nonanthropocentric design, aiming to decenter the
human in design [ 60,61]. These foundational works undoubtedly
informed later developments, even if not always captured under
the same lexicon.
We further acknowledge that our exclusion of short papers
or extended abstracts omits avenues where community engage-
ment around these ideas happens. However, by focusing on peer-
reviewed published papers, we are able to analyse research papers
that have engaged more rigorously with posthuman concepts. Fur-
thermore, by not including terms such as “more-than-human,” the
review deliberately focuses on the “posthuman” terminology, and
we concede that this will exclude overlapping but other distinct
discourses (e.g., Eriksson et al. [68]).
4 Mapping the Posthuman in Computing and
Design
We categorize our findings into three main sections: (1) the general
trend of the posthuman turn in design, (2) the evolving scholarly
composition of the field over time, and (3) the technological and
ecological concerns of posthuman design, along with the domi-
nance of post-anthropocentric and post-dualist characteristics of
posthumanism.
4.1 Posthuman Turn: General Remarks
Papers in our corpus exhibit a consistent publication trajectory
beginning in 2011 (Figure 1), with a notable spike in 2016 coincid-
ing with a special issue on sociomateriality in the ACM SIGMIS
Database — and a sustained upward trend since 2019. Given the
number of papers published up to our cutoff date (September 2024),
this trajectory suggests continued growth through 2025. We refer
to this shift as a posthuman turn — an onto-epistemo-ethical turn in
computing and design research. The ontological, epistemological,
and ethical aspects of this turn are experienced simultaneously
[12], since our assumptions about the world and our place in it
are inherently connected to our assumptions about knowledge
and our experience of it. This shift also carries significant ethical
508
COMPASS ’25, July 22–25, 2025, Toronto, ON, Canada Dedeoğlu and Chandra
and methodological implications, as will be seen in the following
sections.
Several factors contribute to the trend of the posthuman turn.
First, as design scholars increasingly focused on ecological and
climate crises, contributing to areas like sustainable computing and
HCI [ 62,185], posthumanism has provided them with new concep-
tual tools to further navigate these challenges. Second, alongside
ecological concerns, technological advancements — such as artifi-
cial intelligence — created new opportunities and imperatives to
move beyond anthropocentric design paradigms. Third, the rise of
interdisciplinary approaches aligns with the emergence of posthu-
manities beyond ACM venues. Notable developments include the
launch of the Posthumanities book series by Minnesota University
Press in 2007 and the Journal of Posthuman Studies by Penn State
University Press in 2017. Meanwhile, influential scholars such as
Bruno Latour, Donna Haraway, and Rosi Braidotti have continued
to publish works and shape discourse, extending their impact be-
yond the social sciences and humanities into computing and design
research.
4.2 Three Phases of Posthuman Turn
The evolving collaboration between posthumanism and design in
computing can be understood through three phases (Figure 1).
4.2.1 Phase I: Encounter. The first phase marks the initial emer-
gence of “the posthuman” in computing and design, characterized
by isolated and exploratory engagements. While precise periodiza-
tion remains challenging, the earliest paper identified in our search
— “Computer Aided Creativity: Practical Experience and Theoretical
Concerns” by Robert Pepperell [ 163] — signals an early engage-
ment with posthuman themes. Pepperell, also the author of The
Post-Human Condition [162], is recognized as one of the early con-
tributors to posthuman scholarship more broadly. However, his
work appears to have been largely overlooked within the comput-
ing and design community in subsequent years.
During this first phase — which extended into the mid-2010s —
scholars began to address issues tangentially related to posthuman-
ism, often without explicit references to posthuman scholarship.
Technological concerns dominated this phase, with researchers ex-
perimenting with ways to move beyond user-centred paradigms.
These papers explored how technologies could reshape notions
of interaction [ 82], identity [ 190], subjectivity [ 94], and creativity
[163] among others, setting the groundwork for more comprehen-
sive posthuman theorizing in later years. However, in this phase,
the term “posthuman” has not yet been clarified, often oscillating
between posthumanist and transhumanist interpretations.
Towards the end of this phase, some papers engaged more di-
rectly with posthumanities, while others continued to explore
posthuman concepts without explicitly referencing it. For example,
“Smelling, Pulling, and Looking: Unpacking Similarities and Differ-
ences in Dog and Human City Life” [ 8] explored animal-computer
interaction without citing any posthuman scholarship, yet it chal-
lenged anthropocentric view of human-dog relations in the city
and discussed the opportunities that arise from doing so. In con-
trast, “Self-Tracking Cultures: Towards a Sociology of PersonalInformatics” [ 136] explicitly drew on the “entanglements of bod-
ies, technologies, and selves,” incorporating the works of Donna
Haraway and Katherine Hayles into its sociological approach.
4.2.2 Phase II: Integration. The second phase, spanning from the
mid-2010s to around 2019–2020, reflects deeper integration, as schol-
ars purposefully applied posthuman concepts to computing and de-
sign. This phase also shows scholars embracing diverse approaches
rooted in posthumanities, and an increasing recognition of eco-
logical concerns alongside technological ones, reflecting a shift in
priorities. A notable change in this phase was the dominance of new
materialist approaches, often described as part of the “entanglement
turn” [ 78], alongside an increased attention in post-anthropocentric
design [57].
Studies during this phase explored a wide array of topics, in-
cluding agriculture [ 130], agency [ 15,57,74], animal and plant
well-being [ 9,211], the body [ 34,83], automated driving systems
[36], and performative arts [ 146,192], each adopting a posthuman
onto-epistemo-ethical perspective. Some notable works published
during this phase that exemplify this shift include:
•“Becoming With: Towards the Inclusion of Animals as Par-
ticipants in Design Processes”, by Westerlaken and Gualeni
[211], aligns with the animal-computer interaction agenda,
exploring post-anthropocentric interaction design method-
ologies through the concept of “becoming with,” inspired
by the works of Latour and Haraway. Their contribution
advances a participatory design paradigm that transcends
anthropocentrism.
•“Designing for Cohabitation: Naturecultures, Hybrids, and
Decentering the Human in Design” [ 187], by Nancy Smith,
Shaowen Bardzell, and Jeffrey Bardzell [ 187] examines urban
contexts to reveal the potential of concepts such as naturecul-
ture [ 89], hybridity, and decentering the human in design,
offering new perspectives on animal-human-computer inter-
action.
•“Politics of Mattering in the Practices of Participatory De-
sign” [ 165]. Pihkala and Karasti advocate for reimagining
participatory design in ways that align with the ontological
turn and the posthuman landscape.
With the rise of new materialist and post-anthropocentric ap-
proaches, this phase witnessed the exploration of increasingly di-
verse topics and integration of posthuman onto-epistemologies
into participatory design, multispecies interactions, and sustain-
able technological practices. This phase set the stage for a more
self-sustaining posthuman material-discourse, preparing the field
for a deeper transformation.
4.2.3 Phase III: Transformation. The third phase marks a certain
maturation of posthuman scholarship in computing and design,
characterized by a deeper engagement with posthumanities by
scholars such as Laura Forlano, Chris Frauenberger, Ron Wakkary,
Shaowen Bardzell, Jeffrey Bardzell, and colleagues. Unlike earlier
phases, where scholars frequently drew on posthuman scholarship
beyond ACM venues, from this phase onwards there is a greater
engagement with scholarship within the ACM corpus, suggesting
the development of a self-sustaining body of posthuman research
within computing and design.
509
Navigating the Posthuman Turn in Computing and Design: A Posthuman Vocabulary COMPASS ’25, July 22–25, 2025, Toronto, ON, Canada
Figure 1: Paper Counts over Time
A notable development in this phase is the increasing conceptual
distinction between posthumanism and transhumanism. While a
few papers continue to use “posthuman” to describe enhanced hu-
man capacities and capabilities, reflecting a transhumanist perspec-
tive, recent scholarship predominantly aligns with posthumanism’s
critical focus on decentering the human in design. This shift also
challenges the myth of human exceptionalism and exemptionalism,
particularly in relation to ecological concerns. Further, although
new technological agendas, such as music performance [ 218], con-
tinue to emerge, the primary focus of this phase is largely ecological
— essentially, to “design with nature.” Scholars who seek to inves-
tigate more ecological design alternatives engage with Forlano,
Wakkary, S. Bardzell, and J. Bardzell, while Frauenberger’s work is
preferred by the papers concerned with technological concerns. For
instance, recent scholarship on music and technology [ 173,193]
follows Karen Barad through the “entanglement turn, ” as described
by Freuenberger [78].
4.3 Bridging Computing and Design with
Posthumanities
One way to trace the evolution of posthuman scholarship in com-
puting and design is through an analysis of the scholars that the
corpus has engaged with. This approach also offers insights into
how the field has transformed over the three phases. Figures 2 and
3 illustrates the evolution of scholarly engagement and posthu-
man knowledge accumulation throughout the years for the top 5
scholars from within and outside the ACM community.
Examining these trends and considering the three phases of
posthuman theorizing, we make three observations: First, while
postmodern and poststructuralist thinkers such as Gilles Deleuze,Felix Guattari, and Michel Foucault, as well as phenomenologists
like Martin Heidegger and Maurice Merleau-Ponty, appear in these
discussions, they are not the primary sources of knowledge produc-
tion. Instead, their ideas traverse through the works of posthuman-
ities scholars.
Second, the scholars mentioned in Figures 2 and 3 are rarely en-
gaged with in isolation; they are often referenced alongside others,
depending on the paper’s main concern, i.e. whether ecological or
technological. Nevertheless, most papers engage with at least one or
two key concepts from these scholars. This practice of engagement
enables us to map the primary themes within the corpus.
Donna Haraway emerges as the most-engaged-with posthu-
manities scholar, offering foundational concepts such as cyborg
theory, natureculture, and companion species [ 89,91,92], which
have guided post-anthropocentric design approaches. Karen Barad
[10,11] follows closely, influencing both theoretical perspectives
and methodological frameworks through concepts like agential re-
alism and intra-action. Bruno Latour and Rosi Braidotti contribute
significantly, with Latour’s ANT informing discussions on non-
human agency [ 127] and Braidotti’s The Posthuman [31] shaping
definitions of posthuman hybridity. Similarly, Katherine Hayles
[97] provides critical insights into posthuman embodiment and
the critique of Cartesian dualism, influencing studies in computing
and design from a post-dualist, post-Enlightenment angle. More
recently, María Puig de la Bellacasa [ 51] has gained prominence for
her conceptualization of care, integrating ethical and ecological con-
cerns into computing and design. Likewise, Anna Tsing’s practice
of noticing [ 200] and Tim Ingold’s object-oriented anthropology
[109] have been attracting considerable interest among researchers
in the field.
510
COMPASS ’25, July 22–25, 2025, Toronto, ON, Canada Dedeoğlu and Chandra
Figure 2: Engagement Trends over Time: Non-ACM scholars
Other scholars and concepts that migrate from posthumanities
into the papers in our corpus include, but are not limited to, Jane
Bennett’s vibrant matter [ 20], Don Ihde’s [ 107] and Peter-Paul
Verbeek’s postphenomenology [ 179], Graham Harman’s object-
oriented ontology [ 94], Timothy Morton’s agrilogistics and hy-
perobjects [ 144,145], Stacy Alaimo’s transcorporeality [ 3], Diana
Coole’s and Samantha Frost’s new materialist approach to agency
[46], and Patricia MacCormack’s posthuman teratology (the study
of monsters) [ 137]. Collectively, these scholars and their theories
signal a shift toward more entangled, relational, and materially
engaged modes of thinking and designing, signalling a significant
posthuman turn in computing and design research.
Third, there has been a posthuman knowledge accumulation
in the field of computing and design. Initially, posthuman scholar-
ship was predominantly influenced by research published outside
ACM venues. Since the late 2010s, scholars such as Jeffrey Bardzell,
Shaowen Bardzell, Laura Forlano, Chris Frauenberger, and Ron
Wakkary — along with their collaborators — have contributed to
the development of a self-sufficient posthuman material-discourse
within computing and design. This development also reflects a con-
vergence of posthuman scholarship across both ACM and non-ACM
venues, as evidenced by the trends of papers engaging with these
scholars.
Laura Forlano emerges as a key bridging figure between com-
puting, design, and the broader field of posthumanities. Althoughher 2017 paper “Posthumanism and Design” [ 75] was published
during the second phase, we argue that its conceptual impact places
it as an early signal of the third phase, given the limited engage-
ment it received before the 2020s. In this work, Forlano provides a
toolkit for moving beyond human-centred and user-centred design.
She traces posthumanist influences in ANT, feminist new materi-
alism, object-oriented ontology, non-representational theory, and
transhumanism. Crucially, she also presents critical perspectives
on posthumanism from critical race theory and decolonial theory,
broadening posthuman material-discourse beyond Eurocentric con-
cerns. We consider this critical approach essential for developing
a multi-dimensional understanding of posthumanism in design,
which we will revisit in the Discussion section.
Shaowen Bardzell and Jeffrey Bardzell are other two scholars
who enormously contributed to the shaping of posthuman design
in the third phase. One example of these contributions is “Symbiotic
Encounters: HCI and Sustainable Agriculture” [ 130], by Szu-Yu Liu,
Shaowen Bardzell, and Jeffrey Bardzell. This ethnographic study of
alternative farming practices incorporates Anna Tsing’s concept
of “noticing” from The Mushroom at the End of the World [200]
and Haraway’s “companion species” [ 89,91]. This study aims to
situate design within posthuman assemblages and temporalities
while exploring design alternatives through the concepts of “Earth
as a lab” and “intimacy beyond the Biosphere.”
511
Navigating the Posthuman Turn in Computing and Design: A Posthuman Vocabulary COMPASS ’25, July 22–25, 2025, Toronto, ON, Canada
Figure 3: Engagement Trends over Time: ACM Scholars
Ron Wakkary’s “Nomadic Practices: A Posthuman Theory for
Knowing Design” [ 205] and Things We Could Design: For More Than
Human-Centered Worlds [206], represent some of the most influen-
tial contributions to the posthuman transformation of design. In
these works, Wakkary develops a design paradigm called “design-
ing with,” which acknowledges the interconnectedness of human
and nonhuman entities and recognizes the agency of nonhumans.
Oogjes and Wakkary [ 158] demonstrate this approach by combin-
ing Tsing’s concept of noticing with Latour’s translations and Laura
Watts’ landscape ethnography to develop a posthuman repertoire.
Finally, Frauenberger’s “Entanglement HCI: The Next Wave?”
[78] maps the field of HCI through its engagement with actor-
network theory, object-oriented ontology, post-phenomenology,
and agential realism — what he refers to as theories of relational on-
tology — and describes the tendency toward relational ontologies as
the “entanglement turn.” Although the emphasis on entanglement
as a central concept appears to be a scholarly choice, Frauenberger’s
work is one of the few in the corpus that effectively addresses the
five characteristics of posthumanism discussed earlier. We expand
on this in the Discussion section.
4.4 Posthuman Design and Computing:
Different Concerns, Similar Characteristics
As shown in the previous section, researchers in computing and
design engage with different aspects of posthumanism and variousscholars, depending on their specific research concerns. While these
engagements vary in focus, they reflect both the diverse concerns
and the shared characteristics of posthumanism.
Figure 4 illustrates the distribution of papers across two broad
concerns — technological (n = 106) and ecological (n = 65) — and
their intersections with the five defining characteristics of posthu-
manism: post-humanism (PH) (n = 34), post-anthropocentrism (PA)
(n = 132), post-dualism (PD) (n = 98), post-Enlightenment (PE) (n
= 21), and post-technologism (PT) (n = 9). As shown in the figure,
a significant portion of papers exhibit both post-anthropocentric
(PA) and post-dualist (PD) characteristics (n=40 for technological,
n=19 for ecological), or are solely post-anthropocentric (PA) (n=18
for technological, n=12 for ecological). This indicates that papers
address design concerns related to relationships between humans
and nonhuman relations, including animals, plants, or technologies
(PA), as well as issues stemming from a dualistic understanding of
subjectivity and agency (PD).
There are also papers that exhibit additional posthuman charac-
teristics, either in conjunction with PA and PD or independently
of them. Papers aligned with post-humanism (PH) critique the
exclusionary legacies of humanist thought. While papers engag-
ing with post-Enlightenment (PE) question the figure of the au-
tonomous, rational subject, those attentive to post-technologism
(PT) problematize techno-solutionism and interrogate its associated
socio-ecological harms. Collectively, this distribution demonstrates
512
COMPASS ’25, July 22–25, 2025, Toronto, ON, Canada Dedeoğlu and Chandra
Figure 4: This plot visualizes the relationships between five posthumanist characteristics (PH, PA, PD, PE, PT) and ecological
and technological orientations. The set size bars represent the total number of papers categorized under each dimension, while
the intersection bars display co-occurrences, highlighting significant overlaps in conceptual frameworks.
that while post-anthropocentric and post-dualist themes dominate,
there is an emergent attention to the political, epistemological, and
technocritical dimensions of posthumanism in computing and de-
sign research. The Appendix captures the coding for each paper
in the corpus, including its primary concern(s) and posthuman
characteristics.
Notably, four papers [ 25,78,106,118] address both technological
and ecological concerns while exhibiting all five characteristics of
posthumanism. In the Discussion, we explore the value of engaging
with all these characteristics.
4.4.1 Technological posthuman design. Technological posthuman
design challenges the assumption that agency is exclusively a hu-
man trait. Papers in this domain consider technology as possessing
nonhuman agency within the design process. In this context, sus-
tainability should not be understood solely in terms of ecological
sustainability but rather as the sustainability and maintenance of
design processes and artifacts. The posthuman condition, therefore,offers both challenges and opportunities for rethinking human-
machine interactions through the lens of sustainable design.
As an attempt to turn the posthuman challenge into an opportu-
nity, designers attribute creative agency to interactive and digital
technologies. For instance, “Cracking the Code” [ 116] and “Design
Ideation with AI” [ 197] (by the same authors, published in different
venues) explore processes of “co-creation.” These papers engage
with and expand contemporary perspectives by emphasizing the
uncertainties and inconsistencies inherent in programming, while
incorporating creative, embodied, and craft-oriented approaches.
Moreover, the authors of “Message Ritual” [ 170] suggest that posthu-
man design can take many forms, with their contribution specifi-
cally focusing on the integration of artificial intelligence into “the
assembly of agents within the system.” Remarkably, while all three
papers exhibit post-anthropocentric and post-dualist characteris-
tics, “Cracking the Code” also demonstrates post-Enlightenment
attention, as it implicitly questions the Enlightenment subject(ivity).
513
Navigating the Posthuman Turn in Computing and Design: A Posthuman Vocabulary COMPASS ’25, July 22–25, 2025, Toronto, ON, Canada
4.4.2 Ecological posthuman design. Ecological posthuman design
emphasizes ecological sustainability and the well-being of organic
human and nonhuman forms. Following Biggs et al. [ 26], this con-
cern can be seen as the extension of sustainable HCI’s response to
the Anthropocene. The papers in this subsection explore various
topics, such as small farm practices as an alternative to agrilogis-
tics [ 23] — a hegemonic agricultural practice that has prioritized
human civilization at the expense of other life for centuries [ 145],
the potential role of blockchain technologies in promoting global
food justice [ 98], the intersection of care ethics and posthumanism,
proposing epistemological care as a design approach in designing
for more-than-humans [ 121], nature-related technology design for
forest-goers [ 4], autoethnographic design experiments with liv-
ing matters such as bacteria [ 155] and bees [ 108] and posthuman,
place-based design methodologies such as “Dear Nature” [72].
Among ecological posthuman design papers, some also demon-
strate the multi-dimensionality of posthumanism. For instance,
Lindström et al. [ 129] foreground grief and hope as affective ped-
agogical tools, emphasizing the need to unlearn optimism and
confront environmental realities. The study circles introduced in
their research challenge the Enlightenment ideal of the rational, au-
tonomous individual, advocating instead for collective, situated, and
emotional engagement with the future through decarbonization be-
yond technology. Another multi-dimensional posthuman approach
to ecological concerns comes from Ikeya et al. [ 108], whose design
experiment with bees leads to a critical self-reflection on the an-
thropogenic remnants in the study. They acknowledge that “[t]he
introduction of the red mason bees is an anthropogenic action
which could instead have been done by waiting for the species to
naturally visit and inhabit there” [ 108]. This reflection aligns with
alternative approaches to designing-with, which we will revisit in
our discussion of the post-technologist principle.
4.4.3 Bridging technological and ecological concerns. We observe
that some papers combine technological posthuman design and
ecological posthuman design, demonstrating how these concerns
intersect in practice. In “Weaving Stories,” Oogjes and Wakkary
address the question of how nonhuman agency can be incorporated
into design by drawing on Wakkary’s concept of “repertoires” —
actions that human designers can take to enable nonhuman par-
ticipation in the design process [ 158]. Building on Anna Tsing’s
concept of noticing, Bruno Latour’s translations, and Laura Watts’
landscape ethnography, the paper develops three repertoires: notic-
ing through fragility, translating through questions, and employing
landscape ethnography through temporalities. Ultimately, the pa-
per interprets the results of weaving projects as repertoires for “the
speaking subject,” or for understanding what the non-speaking sub-
ject communicates with designers. Such repertoires are valuable as
they can be applied to both technological and ecological concerns
in design.
Similarly, the researchers of “Plant Radio” [ 177] grapple with
the challenge of incorporating nonhuman agency into design by
enhancing the agency of a plant. They achieve this by removing the
button that controls the radio, which is connected to the plant via
sensors, thus giving the plant more control over the system. This
experiment addresses both the ecological concern related to plantagency and the technological challenge of designing with plants in
a viable way.
Lastly, there are also papers in our corpus that bridge technolog-
ical and ecological concerns through technological interventions.
For instance, Brown et al. [ 35] explore post-human design research
through the development of “Nature Scenes,” a project that inte-
grates DIY technological devices with urban ecological engineering
to create interspecies interactions.
5 Discussion: A Posthuman Design Vocabulary
Remembering that all theorizing is inherently political, we contend
that posthuman theorizing of design — and of designers — should
remain attentive to the various interpretations of posthumanism.
We propose that a more comprehensive application of posthuman-
ism in design is necessary, one that aligns with the five charac-
teristics of post-humanism, post-anthropocentrism, post-dualism,
post-Enlightenment, and post-technologism (Table 2). Our analysis
suggest that some of these characteristics are already reflected, in
varying degrees, in the corpus.
As noted, four studies address both technological and ecological
concerns while demonstrating all five characteristics of posthu-
manism. We believe that Frauenberger’s comprehensive study [ 78]
offers a compelling example of this effort, bringing a fresh perspec-
tive to HCI by exploring the potential of various interpretations
of entanglement for design and for mattering beyond user-centred
approaches. Similarly, Ianniello et al. [ 106] engage with all five char-
acteristics, by incorporating decolonial and posthuman feminist
frameworks into their discussion. Jääskeläinen et al. [ 118] extend
diverse posthuman perspectives into AI-driven design, critiquing
the embedded biases of Creative-AI systems and proposing care
ethics as a speculative method for reimagining AI’s interactions
with both humans and more-than-humans. This study particularly
emphasizes multispecies cohabitation, distributed agency, and a
commitment to care and responsibility toward ecological and social
sustainability. Additionally, Biggs et al. [ 24] investigate how historic
redlining — an explicitly racialized housing policy from the 1930s
— intersects with contemporary sustainability issues through an
interdisciplinary lens, attending to both human and nonhuman fac-
tors. By incorporating a multi-dimensional framework, this study
also introduces a political dimension to posthuman design.
We particularly value these efforts because they highlight the
inseparability of onto-epistemo-ethics. By addressing all five char-
acteristics, the researchers advance a design praxis that promotes
sustainability in relation to both technological and ecological con-
cerns. Through the integration of theory and practice, they support
our view of posthuman theorizing as a form of intra-action.
Within this context, we propose a vocabulary of design princi-
ples corresponding to each posthuman characteristics to advance
a more comprehensive posthuman design approach toward just
and inclusive sustainable futures. We believe this goal aligns with
the concerns regarding ethical conundrums [ 78] and ‘not always
positive’ consequences [ 84], such as unseen labour [ 121] or food
insecurity [64].
Design-PA. It is evident that posthumanism is primarily under-
stood as post-anthropocentrism in the papers within our corpus.
514
COMPASS ’25, July 22–25, 2025, Toronto, ON, Canada Dedeoğlu and Chandra
Design Principle Concepts Key Problems
Design-PA
(Post-anthropocentrism)Decentering the human, Noticing, Multispecies
cohabitation, Nomadic practices, Designing-
with, Material expressivityAnthropocentric design norms, Lack of nonhuman
agency in design, Over-reliance on human intentions,
Ethical considerations in decentering the human
Design-PD
(Post-dualism)Beyond binaries, Natureculture, Intra-action,
Subject/abject relations, TranscorporealityPersisting dualistic thinking, Challenges in integrating
nonhuman perspectives, Othering in design methodolo-
gies
Design-PH
(Post-humanism)Intersectional justice, Decolonial perspectives,
Pluriversal design, Response-abilityRisk of overlooking human injustices, Need for inter-
sectional inclusivity, Persisting techno-colonialism
Design-PE
(Post-Enlightenment)Distributed agency, Algorithmic subjectivities,
Situated knowledge, Epistemic humilityAutonomy-centric design frameworks, Mastery and
control in design, Human exceptionalism in knowledge
production
Design-PT
(Post-technologism)Critical technological reflection, Undesigning,
Design inactionUncritical technological progress, Overemphasis on in-
novation, Environmental and social harms of extractive
design
Table 2: Principles, Concepts, and Key Problems in Design
Moving beyond the primacy of the human species, Design-PA re-
configures the human as one among many actants within an in-
terconnected network [ 57]. This principle compels us to design
with an empathy to the symbiotic relationships between human
and more-than-human worlds, promoting ecologies of concern that
foreground the sustainability of all life forms, not merely human
interests.
This principle aligns with the efforts of other design researchers.
For instance, Wakkary’s nomadic practices [ 205] reconfigures de-
sign as an evolving, decentralized, and interconnected set of knowl-
edge systems that do not privilege the human as the sole or primary
agent. Instead of adhering to universalizing, human-centred dis-
ciplinary structures, those practices emphasize situated knowing,
multiplicity of intentionalities, and nomadism, allowing for a more
fluid engagement with nonhuman entities.
Another relevant effort was recently made by Bourgault and Ja-
cobs [ 30]. They contribute to the principle of post-anthropocentrism
by emphasizing the decentering of the human in digital fabrica-
tion processes. The study argues that digital fabrication should not
merely serve human intentions but should engage with machines
and materials as active participants in the design process. This work
extends post-anthropocentric thinking into HCI fabrication by fos-
tering new ways of designing with rather than of materials and
machines, promoting an approach that values distributed agency
and material expressivity.
Design-PD. Design grounded in post-dualism rejects the binary
oppositions — such as nature vs. culture, human vs. machine, or
mind vs. body — that have long structured Western thought. In-
stead, it envisions existence as a fluid and dynamic interplay of
forces, where boundaries dissolve into interfaces of co-emergence.
This principle requires design to flourish symbiotic connections,
acknowledging that all systems, whether biological, technological,
or cultural, are deeply enmeshed in one another [78].In “Watching Myself Watching Birds: Abjection, Ecological
Thinking, and Posthuman Design,” Biggs et al. [ 26] argue that al-
though there is no strict binary between humans and nonhumans,
dualistic thinking has historically caused humans to define them-
selves through the process of Othering. Since the abject — following
Julia Kristeva’s concept of abjection — is a psychological extension
of the human, they argue that designing for nonhumans presents
significant challenges. The authors therefore propose replacing the
subject/object distinction between humans and nonhumans with a
subject/abject relationship.
Contrary to this assumption, Sondergaard and Woytuk argue
that the “understanding of more-than-human bodies should not
be seen merely as an extension of the body” [ 194]. Instead, they
highlight the “fluidity, porosity, and ‘transcorporeality’” — a con-
cept borrowed from Stacy Alaimo — that exists between human
and nonhuman bodies, reflecting a more complex experience and
interaction. Stacy Alaimo’s concept of “transcorporeality” is indeed
useful here in understanding the interconnectedness and encoun-
ters between human and nonhuman bodies and for post-dualist
principle. According to Alaimo, “[t]ranscorporeality does the op-
posite of distancing or dividing the human from external nature”
[3]. From a posthuman design perspective, the human is inherently
posthuman; without the nonhuman, the human cannot exist. In this
light, we interpret the statement in “Watching Myself Watching
Birds” regarding the nonhuman as an extension of the human sub-
ject as based on psychoanalytic, rather than biological, ecological, or
evolutionary grounds. While humans are biologically, ecologically,
and evolutionarily intertwined with the material world, human civ-
ilization has distanced itself from the nonhuman conceptually and
psychologically. This feature of civilization is what Timothy Morton
critiques in their problematization of agrilogistics, a foundational
but problematic pillar of human civilization [144, 145].
Design-PH. We contend that posthuman design must go beyond
simply being more-than-human-centred. In order to design for just
515
Navigating the Posthuman Turn in Computing and Design: A Posthuman Vocabulary COMPASS ’25, July 22–25, 2025, Toronto, ON, Canada
and inclusive sustainability futures, we should decenter the human
but still take injustices against marginal human communities into
account. Several papers in our corpus, as well as others encountered
during our research, argue that posthuman perspectives should be
integrated with indigenous and decolonial philosophies, as they
risk overlooking the human in their focus on decentering it [ 106,
121, 194].
Pihkala and Karasti’s [ 166] emphasis on relational ontologies
through the concept of response-ability aligns with the posthuman
commitment to dismantling exclusionary structures and fostering
ethical engagements both within the human species and across
species and material entanglements. Similarly, Falk et al. [ 69] argue
for diversity computing as a means to integrate pluralistic perspec-
tives into design, resisting tokenistic inclusion and instead creating
agonistic spaces where intersecting identities and perspectives can
coexist meaningfully. This resonates with the posthuman imper-
ative to not only decenter the human (post-anthropocentric) but
also confront historical and systemic inequalities that shape partic-
ipation in design (post-humanist). Similarly, Ianniello et al.’s [ 106]
exploration of pluriversal design further reinforces this approach
by advocating for decolonial and post-human feminist perspec-
tives, dismantling species hierarchies, and positioning design as a
facilitator of more-than-human symbiosis.
The discussion of “post-growth” [ 183], by introducing an alter-
native economic orientation, also questions computing’s role in ex-
acerbating unsustainable growth and advocating for redistributive,
localized, and care-based approaches in sociotechnical systems. Jan-
icki et al. [ 113] demonstrate how more-than-human entanglements
are not merely ecological but also deeply political, intersecting
with histories of racial capitalism and environmental disposses-
sion. Lastly, Biggs et al.’s work [ 25] highlight how interdisciplinary
methods, such as map-making, can reveal the entanglements of
past and present, advocating for posthuman design principles that
take racial and social justice into account. Together, these works
highlight that posthuman design is not merely about expanding the
scope of agency beyond humans but also about embedding justice,
care, and political responsibility into design methodologies.
In this respect, the Design-PH principle must fundamentally chal-
lenge and subvert systems of domination and exclusion that have
historically privileged certain groups of humans while marginal-
izing others. At its core, this principle seeks to dismantle human
hierarchies rooted in the legacies of advanced capitalism, colonial-
ism, and racial and gender oppression. Design-PH envisions a world
where the inherent worth of all individuals is recognized, irrespec-
tive of race, gender, belief, ability, or socio-economic standing. By
resisting the commodification and instrumentalization of human
life, this approach refuses to reduce individuals to their economic
or functional roles. Instead, it calls for design practices that foster
human dignity, promote equity, and cultivate spaces of collective
flourishing, thus transcending exclusionary humanist frameworks.
Design-PE. A post-Enlightenment approach to design critiques
the ideal of the autonomous, rational individual that dominated
modernity. It embraces a relational and embodied onto-epistemo-
ethics that challenges notions of knowledge and agency as pre-
determined by the figure of the Western, Christian man. Design,from this perspective, must move beyond mastery and control, cul-
tivating forms of practice that recognize the interdependence of all
beings and the situated nature of knowledge.
This shift requires recognizing knowledge and agency as dis-
tributed across human and nonhuman actants, material infras-
tructures, and algorithmic processes. In this respect, Baumer et
al.’s [ 16] discussion of algorithmic subjectivities critiques the as-
sumption of an autonomous human subject, instead highlighting
the co-constitution of human identities, technological infrastruc-
tures, and systemic classification mechanisms. On a similar ground,
Ikeya et al. [ 108] critiques traditional human-centric approaches
by demonstrating how design can foster multispecies relationships
through attentiveness to local ecologies. This aligns with the post-
Enlightenment rejection of mastery and control, positioning the
designer as a cohabitant rather than a dominant force. Similarly,
Ferreira and Hsi [ 72] undermine the Enlightenment ideal of ob-
jective, universal knowledge by emphasizing the subjective and
affective dimensions of data representation. These studies illustrate
how post-Enlightenment design methodologies cultivate epistemic
humility — which aligns with situated knowing behind the ideal
of “designing with” [ 205]. This embraces pluralistic, embodied, and
contextual forms of knowledge while actively resisting the hierar-
chical structures of modernity.
Design-PT. In resisting the uncritical celebration of technological
progress, Design-PT calls for a reflective stance on the socioeco-
logical consequences of technological intensification [ 164]. It urges
design to interrogate the entanglement of technology with systems
of injustice and exploitation, advocating for a reorientation toward
technologies that promote sustainability, ethical accountability,
and the flourishing of both human and nonhuman worlds. Post-
technologism can be practiced in two ways: designing differently
and undesigning.
We can imagine Design-PT in terms of alternate ways of design-
ing with [ 206]. In this sense, “Designing for Interdependence of
Bees” [ 108] challenges conventional technological interventions
by demonstrating how design can foster reciprocal relationships
with nonhuman entities, encouraging attunement to ecological
rhythms rather than technological control. Similarly, “Dear Nature”
[72] offers an alternative to the dominant data-driven paradigm,
where qualitative, embodied, and context-rich data practices pro-
mote deeper engagement with environmental sensemaking instead
of reducing nature to quantifiable metrics. These works exemplify
alternative approaches that align with post-technologism’s call to
not only reflect on the socioecological consequences of technolog-
ical intensification but also actively explore forms of design that
move beyond innovation-driven problem-solving.
The design field is still understandably dominated by techno-
logical innovation. However, we also need to focus on unmaking
and undesigning material-discursive practices as a social inno-
vation, which corresponds to post-technologism. This principle
is reinforced by scholarship advocating for undesigning and de-
sign inaction as legitimate — and even necessary — responses to
unsustainable technological intensification. Pierce’s Undesigning
Technology [164] introduces the concept of intentional negation
of technology, arguing that design should not only create but also
dismantle technologies that contribute to environmental and social
516
COMPASS ’25, July 22–25, 2025, Toronto, ON, Canada Dedeoğlu and Chandra
harms. Sandelin and Homewood [ 182] further develop this idea
by framing inaction as a form of activism, where the decision to
not design can be an ethical, political, and designerly act. These
interventions align with the principle of Design-PT by emphasizing
inhibition, displacement, and even erasure of harmful technolog-
ical interventions rather than perpetuating an innovation-driven
approach.
We argue that posthuman design must incorporate these five
principles (Design-PH, Design-PA, Design-PD, Design-PE, and
Design-PT) to effectively address the intersectional challenges of
the posthuman condition. While Rajcic and McCormack suggest,
“[p]osthuman design explores what it is like to design with humans
and non-humans, rather than for an idealized ‘user’” [ 170], we sug-
gest that posthuman design should encompass more, bringing atten-
tion to onto-epistemo-ethical dimensions. Based on the papers in
our corpus and the preceding discussion, we propose the following
definition: Posthuman Design is a critical and inclusive approach to
design that challenges traditional human-centred paradigms by inte-
grating the five principles of posthumanism: post-humanism, post-
anthropocentrism, post-dualism, post-Enlightenment, and post-
technologism. Grounded in these principles, posthuman design
aims to dismantle hierarchical power and knowledge structures,
avoid human exceptionalism and exemptionalism, and promote eth-
ical engagements among human, nonhuman, and material realms
— in short, among posthumans.
This includes avoiding the creation of new binaries, such as
human versus more-than-human, while maintaining a critical focus
on marginalized posthuman communities affected by oppressive
structures like agrilogistics, patriarchy, colonialism, and racism. As
Donna Haraway has argued, “we have never been human” [ 90], but
have always existed within systems of marginalization, exploitation,
and domination. Furthermore, Karen Barad’s assertion [ 12] about
the importance of attending to material-discursive phenomena in
their entanglements — particularly in addressing “the questions of
justice that are integral to the doing of science” — is equally relevant
to design. A more critical political stance is necessary in design and
designerly speculations about sustainable futures [ 189], one that
explicitly rejects both human exceptionalism and exemptionalism
[55] and advocates for an ethical reconfiguration of technological
development that acknowledges the rights and agency of animals
and ecosystems [ 35]. The posthuman design papers in our corpus
illustrate how such a stance can be articulated and applied through
multidimensional understandings of posthumanism.
6 Conclusion
Through this study, we demonstrate that posthuman design is
emerging as a significant paradigm that moves beyond human-
centred approaches in design and computing research. Our findings
build upon and extend Bødker’s emphasis on participatory and
shared interactions [ 28] and Harrison et al.’s [ 95] discussion on
paradigms by framing posthuman design as a multi-species par-
ticipatory response to contemporary challenges in computing and
design.
Our findings show how posthuman design is actively challeng-
ing anthropocentric and technocentric biases, addressing injustices
against both marginalized human and nonhuman communities,and applies posthuman perspectives through material-discursive
practices. From participatory engagements with nonhuman ecolo-
gies to critical technological interventions resisting extractivist and
exclusionary design models, posthuman design is reshaping the
field.
At the core of posthuman design are five interconnected princi-
ples: post-humanism (Design-PT; an inclusive understanding of the
human), post-anthropocentrism (Design-PA; an inclusive under-
standing of species), post-dualism (Design-PD; rejection of binary
oppositions), post-Enlightenment (Design-PE; critique of the ratio-
nal, autonomous individual), and post-technologism (Design-PT;
a critical stance toward technological progress). These principles
challenge the dominant narratives of modernity, human exception-
alism, and techno-solutionism, urging us to rethink design in ways
that promote just sustainabilities. Our findings illustrate how these
principles are already being explored in the computing and design
research communities, but they also highlight the need for a more
explicit articulation of posthuman design’s political and ethical
commitments. By integrating these principles, posthuman design
offers a transformative framework for reimagining policy and tech-
nology design, including the design of AI systems, in shaping more
just, equitable, and sustainable futures.
While this study has mapped the landscape of posthuman de-
sign and articulated its foundational principles, future work should
further explore how posthuman perspectives can be leveraged as a
lens for understanding and advancing social justice within human
communities. Although posthuman design has largely focused on
decentering the human and addressing injustices against nonhu-
man entities, there remains an opportunity to explicitly examine
how posthumanism can contribute to intersectional justice efforts,
particularly in relation to race, gender, disability, and class. Future
research should investigate how posthuman design principles —
such as post-dualism and post-Enlightenment critique — can be
applied to dismantle social hierarchies that persist within techno-
logical development and design practices.
Acknowledgments
The authors acknowledge Kit Haehnel for their assistance with
data collection for this project.
References
[1]Muhammad Sadi Adamu and Makuochi Samuel Nkwo. 2023. "Remembering” as
a Decolonial Praxis in African HCI and Design. In Proceedings of the 4th African
Human Computer Interaction Conference . 118–124.
[2]Yoko Akama, Ann Light, and Takahito Kamihira. 2020. Expanding Participation
to Design with More-Than-Human Concerns. In Proceedings of the 16th Partici-
patory Design Conference 2020 - Participation(s) Otherwise - Volume 1 (PDC ’20) .
ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3385010.3385016
[3]Stacy Alaimo et al .2008. Trans-corporeal feminisms and the ethical space of
nature. Material Feminisms 25, 2 (2008), 237–264.
[4]Ferran Altarriba Bertran, Jordi Márquez Puig, Maria Llop Cirera, Eva Forest Illas,
Joan Planas Bertran, Ernest Forts Plana, Oğuz “Oz” Buruk, Çağlar Genç, Mattia
Thibault, and Juho Hamari. 2023. Designing and Using the Wild Probes Toolkit
(v1) to Co-Design From-the-Wild. In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM Designing
Interactive Systems Conference (DIS ’23) . ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3563657.
3596102
[5]Timothy R. Amidon and W. Michele Simmons. 2016. Negotiating “Messy”
Research Context and Design Through Adaptive Research Stances: Experience
Report. In Proceedings of the 34th ACM International Conference on the Design
of Communication (SIGDOC ’16, Vol. 61) . ACM, 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1145/
2987592.2987622
517
Navigating the Posthuman Turn in Computing and Design: A Posthuman Vocabulary COMPASS ’25, July 22–25, 2025, Toronto, ON, Canada
[6]Kayla Anderson. 2014. Object intermediaries: how new media artists translate
the language of things. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2014 Art Gallery (SIGGRAPH ’14) .
ACM, 352–359. https://doi.org/10.1145/2601080.2677712
[7]Simone Ashby, Julian Hanna, Sónia Matos, Callum Nash, and Alexis Faria.
2019. Fourth-wave HCI meets the 21st century manifesto. In Proceedings of the
Halfway to the Future Symposium 2019 . 1–11.
[8]Fredrik Aspling, Oskar Juhlin, and Elisa Chiodo. 2015. Smelling, pulling, and
looking: unpacking similarities and differences in dog and human city life.
InProceedings of the 12th International Conference on Advances in Computer
Entertainment Technology (ACE 2015, Vol. 38) . ACM, 1–9. https://doi.org/10.
1145/2832932.2837013
[9]Fredrik Aspling, Jinyi Wang, and Oskar Juhlin. 2016. Plant-computer interaction,
beauty and dissemination. In Proceedings of the Third International Conference on
Animal-Computer Interaction (ACI ’16) . ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/2995257.
2995393
[10] Karen Barad. 2003. Posthumanist performativity: Toward an understanding of
how matter comes to matter. Signs: Journal of women in culture and society 28,
3 (2003), 801–831.
[11] Karen Barad. 2007. Meeting the universe halfway: Quantum physics and the
entanglement of matter and meaning. Duke Up (2007).
[12] Karen Barad and Daniela Gandorfer. 2021. Political desirings: Yearnings for
mattering (,) differently. Theory & Event 24, 1 (2021), 14–66.
[13] Manuhuia Barcham. 2023. Decolonizing Computing and the Quest for Ontolog-
ical Justice-Putting Fourth-Wave HCI/IxD Into Practice. In Proceedings of the
35th Australian Computer-Human Interaction Conference . 486–492.
[14] Jeffrey Bardzell, Shaowen Bardzell, and Ann Light. 2021. Wanting To Live Here:
Design After Anthropocentric Functionalism. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’21) . ACM. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445167
[15] Eric P. S. Baumer and Jed R. Brubaker. 2017. Post-userism. In Proceedings of the
2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’17) . ACM.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025740
[16] Eric P. S. Baumer, Alex S. Taylor, Jed R. Brubaker, and Micki McGee. 2024.
Algorithmic Subjectivities. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction
31, 3 (June 2024), 1–34. https://doi.org/10.1145/3660344
[17] Fiona Bell, Derrek Chow, Hyelin Choi, and Mirela Alistar. 2023. Scopy breast-
plate: Slowly growing a microbial interface. In Proceedings of the Seventeenth
International Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied Interaction (TEI
’23). ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3569009.3572805
[18] Fiona Bell, Erin Mcclure, Camila Friedman-Gerlicz, Ruby Ta, and Leah Buechley.
2024. Shape-Changing Clay-Dough: Taking a Material-Oriented Approach to
3D Printing Ceramic Forms. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’24, Vol. 13) . ACM, 1–19. https://doi.org/10.
1145/3613904.3642246
[19] Jesse Josua Benjamin, Arne Berger, Nick Merrill, and James Pierce. 2021. Machine
Learning Uncertainty as a Design Material: A Post-Phenomenological Inquiry. In
Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI ’21) . ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445481
[20] Jane Bennett. 2020. Vibrant matter: A political ecology of things . Duke University
Press.
[21] Fikret Berkes. 1993. Traditional ecological knowledge in perspective. Traditional
ecological knowledge: Concepts and cases (1993).
[22] Heidi Biggs and Shaowen Bardzell. 2024. Thrown from Normative Ground:
Exploring the Potential of Disorientation as a Critical Methodological Strategy
in HCI. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI ’24) . ACM, 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1145/3613904.3642724
[23] Heidi Biggs, Tejaswini Joshi, Ries Murphy, Jeffrey Bardzell, and Shaowen
Bardzell. 2021. Alternatives to Agrilogistics: Designing for Ecological Thinking.
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 5, CSCW2 (Oct. 2021),
1–31. https://doi.org/10.1145/3479557
[24] Heidi Biggs, Alexa Marcotte, and Shaowen Bardzell. 2023. TikTok as a Stage:
Performing Rural #farmqueer Utopias on TikTok. In Proceedings of the 2023
ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference (DIS ’23) . ACM. https://doi.org/
10.1145/3563657.3596038
[25] Heidi Biggs, Shellye Suttles, and Shaowen Bardzell. 2023. Redlining Maps and
Terrains of Sustainability:: Interdisciplinary Mapping of Racialized Redlining
to Present-Day Sustainability Agendas in HCI. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’23, Vol. 25) . ACM,
1–18. https://doi.org/10.1145/3544548.3581491
[26] Heidi R. Biggs, Jeffrey Bardzell, and Shaowen Bardzell. 2021. Watching Myself
Watching Birds: Abjection, Ecological Thinking, and Posthuman Design. In
Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI ’21) . ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445329
[27] Simone Bignall, Steve Hemming, and Daryle Rigney. 2016. Three ecosophies
for the Anthropocene: Environmental governance, continental posthumanism
and indigenous expressivism. Deleuze Studies 10, 4 (2016), 455–478.
[28] Susanne Bødker. 2015. Third-wave HCI, 10 years later—participation and sharing.
interactions 22, 5 (2015), 24–31.[29] Ashley Boone, Christopher A. Le Dantec, and Carl DiSalvo. 2024. Embodied
Traces: Multispecies Entanglement in Urban Spaces. In Designing Interactive
Systems Conference (DIS ’24) . ACM, 1074–1086. https://doi.org/10.1145/3643834.
3660746
[30] Sam Bourgault and Jennifer Jacobs. 2024. Millipath: Bridging Materialist Theory
and System Development for Surface Texture Fabrication. In Designing Interac-
tive Systems Conference (DIS ’24) . ACM, 50–68. https://doi.org/10.1145/3643834.
3661599
[31] Rosi Braidotti. 2013. The Posthuman . Polity Press, Malden, MA, USA.
[32] Rosi Braidotti. 2019. A theoretical framework for the critical posthumanities.
Theory, Culture & Society 36, 6 (2019), 31–61.
[33] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2019. Reflecting on reflexive thematic
analysis. Qualitative Research in Sport, Exercise and Health 11, 4 (2019), 589–597.
[34] Lauren M. Britton and Bryan Semaan. 2017. Manifesting the Cyborg through
Techno-Body Modification: From Human-Computer Interaction to Integration.
InProceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI ’17) . ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025629
[35] Dean Brown, Liliana Ovalle, and Naho Matsuda. 2023. A Practice-Based Ap-
proach to Post-Human Computer Interaction: Design Notes from Nature Scenes.
InProceedings of the Seventeenth International Conference on Tangible, Embedded,
and Embodied Interaction (TEI ’23) . ACM, 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1145/3569009.
3572802
[36] Sandra Buchmüller, Corinna Bath, and Roman Henze. 2018. To whom does the
driver’s seat belong in the future?: a case of negotiation between gender studies
and automotive engineering. In Proceedings of the 4th Conference on Gender &
IT - GenderIT ’18 (GenderIT ’18) . ACM Press, 165–174. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3196839.3196866
[37] Shannon Butts and Madison Jones. 2021. Deep mapping for environmental
communication design. Communication Design Quarterly 9, 1 (March 2021),
4–19. https://doi.org/10.1145/3437000.3437001
[38] Tara Capel and Margot Brereton. 2023. What is Human-Centered about Human-
Centered AI? A Map of the Research Landscape. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’23, Vol. 24) . ACM,
1–23. https://doi.org/10.1145/3544548.3580959
[39] Chiara Ceccarini, Marta Ferreira, Catia Prandi, Nuno Nunes, and Valentina Nisi.
2023. Unusual suspects - visualizing unusual relationships of complex social
phenomena with climate change. In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM Conference
on Information Technology for Social Good (GoodIT ’23, Vol. 30) . ACM, 494–503.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3582515.3609572
[40] Priyank Chandra. 2021. Piracy and the Impaired Cyborg: Assistive Technolo-
gies, Accessibility, and Access. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer
Interaction 4, CSCW3 (Jan. 2021), 1–21. https://doi.org/10.1145/3432941
[41] Michelle Chang, Chenyi Shen, Aditi Maheshwari, Andreea Danielescu, and
Lining Yao. 2022. Patterns and Opportunities for the Design of Human-Plant
Interaction. In Designing Interactive Systems Conference (DIS ’22) . ACM. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3532106.3533555
[42] Yuning Chen and Larissa Pschetz. 2024. Microbial Revolt: Redefining biolab
tools and practices for more-than-human care ecologies. In Proceedings of the
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’24, Vol. 130) . ACM,
1–16. https://doi.org/10.1145/3613904.3641981
[43] Hyungjun Cho, Jiyeon Lee, Bonhee Ku, Yunwoo Jeong, Shakhnozakhon
Yadgarova, and Tek-Jin Nam. 2023. ARECA: A Design Speculation on Everyday
Products Having Minds. In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM Designing Interactive
Systems Conference (DIS ’23) . ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3563657.3596002
[44] Patricia Ciobanu and Oskar Juhlin. 2022. Me, the Hill and My Browser – Inves-
tigating the Role of Time in Posthuman Interaction. In Nordic Human-Computer
Interaction Conference (NordiCHI ’22) . ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3546155.
3546651
[45] Mary Clinkenbeard. 2018. Multimodal conversation analysis and usability
studies: exploring human-technology interactions in multiparty contexts. Com-
munication Design Quarterly 6, 2 (Oct. 2018), 103–113. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3282665.3282675
[46] Diana Coole and Samantha Frost. 2010. New materialisms: Ontology, agency, and
politics . Duke University Press.
[47] Ned Cooper. 2022. Would the Trees Dim the Lights? Adopting the Inten-
tional Stance for More-Than-Human Participatory Design. In Proceedings of
the Participatory Design Conference 2022 - Volume 2 (PDC 2022) . ACM. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3537797.3537799
[48] Erika Cudworth and Stephen Hobden. 2017. The emancipatory project of posthu-
manism . Routledge.
[49] Michael J. Cuellar. 2016. Critical Realism as a Sociomaterial Stream of Research.
ACM SIGMIS Database: the DATABASE for Advances in Information Systems 47,
4 (Dec. 2016), 60–66. https://doi.org/10.1145/3025099.3025106
[50] Christine Daigle and Terrance H McDonald. 2022. Posthumanisms through
Deleuze and Guattari. From Deleuze and Guattari to Posthumanism (2022), 1.
[51] Maria Puig de La Bellacasa. 2017. Matters of care: Speculative ethics in more than
human worlds . University of Minnesota Press.
518
COMPASS ’25, July 22–25, 2025, Toronto, ON, Canada Dedeoğlu and Chandra
[52] Çağdaş Dedeoğlu. 2023. Posthuman citizenship. Citizenship Studies 27, 8 (2023),
983–1002. https://doi.org/10.1080/13621025.2023.2271867
[53] Çağdaş Dedeoğlu and Nikoleta Zampaki. 2023. Posthumanism for sustainability:
A scoping review. Journal of Posthumanism 3, 1 (2023), 33–57. https://doi.org/
10.33182/joph.v3i1.2761
[54] Çağdaş Dedeoğlu. 2020. Hey Siri: Do you believe in god? A posthuman exposé
of belief bias in AI programming. In Technology and Theology , William H.U.
Anderson (Ed.). Vernon Press, 77–90.
[55] Jaime del Val and Çağdaş Dedeoğlu. 2023. Introduction: Metahuman futures
forum and ontological therapies. Journal of Posthumanism 3, 2 (2023), 85–102.
https://doi.org/10.33182/joph.v3i2.3096
[56] Audrey Desjardins, Heidi R. Biggs, Cayla Key, and Jeremy E. Viny. 2020. IoT
Data in the Home: Observing Entanglements and Drawing New Encounters. In
Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI ’20) . ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376342
[57] Laura Devendorf, Abigail De Kosnik, Kate Mattingly, and Kimiko Ryokai. 2016.
Probing the Potential of Post-Anthropocentric 3D Printing. In Proceedings of the
2016 ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems (DIS ’16) . ACM. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/2901790.2901879
[58] Laura Devendorf, Kathryn Walters, Marianne Fairbanks, Etta Sandry, and
Emma R Goodwill. 2023. AdaCAD: Parametric Design as a New Form of Nota-
tion for Complex Weaving. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’23) . ACM, 1–18. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3544548.3581571
[59] Rosalyn Diprose. 2009. Toward an ethico-politics of the posthuman: Foucault
and Merleau-Ponty. Parrhesia 8, December (2009), 7–19.
[60] Carl DiSalvo and Jonathan Lukens. 2009. Seeing the City Through Machines:
Non-Anthropocentric Design and Youth Robotics. Digital Cities 6 (2009).
[61] Carl DiSalvo and Jonathan Lukens. 2011. Nonanthropocentrism and the nonhu-
man in design: possibilities for designing new forms of engagement with and
through technology. In From social butterfly to engaged citizen: urban informat-
ics, social media, ubiquitous computing, and mobile technology to support citizen
engagement , Marcus Foth, Laura Forlano, Christine Satchell, and Martin Gibbs
(Eds.). MIT Press Cambridge.
[62] Carl DiSalvo, Phoebe Sengers, and Hrönn Brynjarsdóttir. 2010. Mapping the
landscape of sustainable HCI. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems . 1975–1984.
[63] Fernanda Dobal and Vali Lalioti. 2021. Circular Species: Designing critical
thinking into children’s science education through biomaterials and augmented
reality. In Interaction Design and Children (IDC ’21) . ACM. https://doi.org/10.
1145/3459990.3460698
[64] Olivia Doggett, Kelly Bronson, and Robert Soden. 2023. HCI Research on Agricul-
ture: Competing Sociotechnical Imaginaries, Definitions, and Opportunities. In
Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI ’23) . ACM, 1–24. https://doi.org/10.1145/3544548.3581081
[65] Graham Dove and Anne-Laure Fayard. 2020. Monsters, Metaphors, and Ma-
chine Learning. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems (CHI ’20, Vol. 104) . ACM, 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3313831.3376275
[66] Ewa Drygalska. 2024. Technologically Mediated Experiences of Visitors to the
Frederic Chopin Museum: Postphenomenological Perspective on Touchscreens
Affordances. Journal on Computing and Cultural Heritage 17, 1 (Feb. 2024), 1–22.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3631127
[67] Amany R. Elbanna. 2016. Doing Sociomateriality Research in Information
Systems. ACM SIGMIS Database: the DATABASE for Advances in Information
Systems 47, 4 (Dec. 2016), 84–92. https://doi.org/10.1145/3025099.3025108
[68] Eva Eriksson, Daisy Yoo, Tilde Bekker, and Elisabet M Nilsson. 2024. More-
than-Human Perspectives in Human-Computer Interaction Research: A Scoping
Review. In Proceedings of the 13th Nordic Conference on Human-Computer Inter-
action . 1–18.
[69] Jeanette Falk, Moritz Kubesch, Anna Blumenkranz, and Christopher Frauen-
berger. 2023. Three Design Directions for a Diversity Computing Design Space.
InProceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI ’23, Vol. 1) . ACM, 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1145/3544548.3581155
[70] Francesca Ferrando. 2013. Posthumanism, transhumanism, antihumanism,
metahumanism, and new materialisms. Existenz 8, 2 (2013), 26–32.
[71] Francesca Ferrando. 2019. Philosophical posthumanism . Bloomsbury Publishing.
[72] Marta Galvão Ferreira and Sherry Hsi. 2024. Dear Nature: Using data drawings
to promote sensemaking in human-nature relations. In Designing Interactive
Systems Conference (DIS ’24) . ACM, 1426–1438. https://doi.org/10.1145/3643834.
3660732
[73] Marta Galvão Ferreira, Nuno Jardim Nunes, and Valentina Nisi. 2024. Towards
Relatable Climate Change Data: Untangling Tensions in Engaging with a Hyper-
object. In Designing Interactive Systems Conference (DIS ’24) . ACM, 3029–3045.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3643834.3661606
[74] Patricia Flanagan and Raune Frankjaer. 2018. Rewilding Wearables: Sympoeitic
Interfaces for Empathic Experience of Other-than-human Entities. In Proceedings
of the Twelfth International Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and EmbodiedInteraction (TEI ’18) . ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3173225.3173316
[75] Laura Forlano. 2017. Posthumanism and design. She Ji: The Journal of Design,
Economics, and Innovation 3, 1 (2017), 16–29.
[76] Laura E. Forlano and Megan K. Halpern. 2023. Speculative Histories, Just Futures:
From Counterfactual Artifacts to Counterfactual Actions. ACM Transactions on
Computer-Human Interaction 30, 2 (April 2023), 1–37. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3577212
[77] Raune Frankjaer and Peter Dalsgaard. 2020. Knowledge-creation Processes
in Crafts-based HCI Research: Introducing a Sympoietic Framework. In Pro-
ceedings of the 11th Nordic Conference on Human-Computer Interaction: Shap-
ing Experiences, Shaping Society (NordiCHI ’20, Vol. 6) . ACM, 1–12. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3419249.3420114
[78] Christopher Frauenberger. 2019. Entanglement HCI The Next Wave? ACM
Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction 27, 1 (Nov. 2019), 1–27. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3364998
[79] Jonas Fritsch, Joanna Saad-Sulonen, and Giacomo Poderi. 2022. The Problem(s)
of Caring for the Commons. In Nordic Human-Computer Interaction Conference
(NordiCHI ’22) . ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3546155.3547287
[80] Philip B. Gallagher. 2019. Redesigning audiences in technical communication.
InProceedings of the 37th ACM International Conference on the Design of Com-
munication (SIGDOC ’19, Vol. 78) . ACM, 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1145/3328020.
3353914
[81] Timnit Gebru and Émile P Torres. 2024. The TESCREAL bundle: Eugenics
and the promise of utopia through artificial general intelligence. First Monday
(2024).
[82] Petra Gemeinboeck. 2005. Constituting, traversing and perforating boundaries:
embodied interaction in immersive virtual spaces. In Proceedings of the 5th
conference on Creativity & cognition - C&C ’05 (C&C ’05) . ACM Press, 41. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/1056224.1056232
[83] Petra Gemeinboeck and Rob Saunders. 2017. Movement Matters: How a Robot
Becomes Body. In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Movement
Computing (MOCO ’17) . ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3077981.3078035
[84] Elisa Giaccardi, Johan Redström, and Iohanna Nicenboim. 2025. The making (s)
of more-than-human design: Introduction to the special issue on more-than-
human design and HCI. Human-Computer Interaction 40, 1-4 (2025), 1–16.
[85] Oliver Gingrich, Alain Renaud, Eugenia Emets, and Zhidong Xiao. 2014. Trans-
mission: a telepresence interface for neural and kinetic interaction. In ACM
SIGGRAPH 2014 Art Gallery (SIGGRAPH ’14, Vol. 3) . ACM, 375–385. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/2601080.2677715
[86] Andrea Gogova. 2021. Transient Pattern – the Model of Digital Layout. In 10th
International Conference on Digital and Interactive Arts (ARTECH 2021) . ACM,
1–5. https://doi.org/10.1145/3483529.3483716
[87] Chris Hables Gray. 2000. Cyborg citizen: Politics in the posthuman age . Routledge.
[88] Lone Koefoed Hansen and Margrete Lodahl Rolighed. 2024. Encountering
Human-Plant Relations: a Discussion of How Interaction Design Can encourage
Human Sensibility to More-than-human Plants. In Designing Interactive Systems
Conference (DIS ’24) . ACM, 1400–1411. https://doi.org/10.1145/3643834.3661586
[89] Donna Haraway. 2003. The companion species manifesto: dogs, people, and
significant otherness . Prickly Paradigm Press.
[90] Donna Haraway. 2004. We Have Never Been Human. (2004). http://hdl.handle.
net/1828/6848 Presentation, Pacific Centre for Technology and Culture, Victoria,
B.C., March 18, 2004.
[91] Donna Haraway. 2008. When species meet . University of Minnesota Press.
[92] Donna Haraway. 2013. A cyborg manifesto: Science, technology, and socialist-
feminism in the late twentieth century. In The transgender studies reader . Rout-
ledge, 103–118.
[93] Graham Harman. 2018. Object-oriented ontology: A new theory of everything .
Penguin UK.
[94] Ellie Harmon and Melissa Mazmanian. 2013. Stories of the Smartphone in
everyday discourse: conflict, tension & instability. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’13) . ACM. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/2470654.2466134
[95] Steve Harrison, Deborah Tatar, and Phoebe Sengers. 2007. The three paradigms
of HCI. In Alt. Chi. Session at the SIGCHI Conference on human factors in com-
puting systems San Jose, California, USA . 1–18.
[96] Nik Rushdi Hassan. 2016. Editorial: A Brief History of the Material in Socio-
materiality. ACM SIGMIS Database: the DATABASE for Advances in Information
Systems 47, 4 (Dec. 2016), 10–22. https://doi.org/10.1145/3025099.3025101
[97] N Katherine Hayles. 1999. How We Became Posthuman: Virtual Bodies in
Cybernetics, Literature, and Informatics.
[98] Sara Heitlinger, Lara Houston, Alex Taylor, and Ruth Catlow. 2021. Algorith-
mic Food Justice: Co-Designing More-than-Human Blockchain Futures for the
Food Commons. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (CHI ’21) . ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445655
[99] Karey Helms. 2021. Entangled Reflections on Designing with Leaky Breastfeed-
ing Bodies. In Designing Interactive Systems Conference 2021 (DIS ’21) . ACM,
1998–2012. https://doi.org/10.1145/3461778.3462048
519
Navigating the Posthuman Turn in Computing and Design: A Posthuman Vocabulary COMPASS ’25, July 22–25, 2025, Toronto, ON, Canada
[100] Daniel Hocutt. 2021. Interrogating Alexa: Holding Voice Assistants Accountable
for Their Answers. In The 39th ACM International Conference on Design of
Communication (SIGDOC ’21, Vol. 7) . ACM, 142–150. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3472714.3473634
[101] Sarah Homewood, Marika Hedemyr, Maja Fagerberg Ranten, and Susan Kozel.
2021. Tracing Conceptions of the Body in HCI: From User to More-Than-Human.
InProceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI ’21) . ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445656
[102] Sarah Homewood, Amanda Karlsson, and Anna Vallgårda. 2020. Removal as a
method: A fourth wave HCI approach to understanding the experience of self-
tracking. In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM designing interactive systems conference .
1779–1791.
[103] Sarah Homewood, Amanda Karlsson, and Anna Vallgårda. 2020. Removal as
a Method: A Fourth Wave HCI Approach to Understanding the Experience
of Self-Tracking. In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM Designing Interactive Systems
Conference (DIS ’20) . ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3357236.3395425
[104] Mark-David Hosale, Erika Batdorf, Kate Digby, and Alan Macy. 2019. Perfor-
mance, Art, and Cyber-Interoceptive Systems (PACIS). In Proceedings of the 6th
International Conference on Movement and Computing (MOCO ’19, Vol. 2) . ACM,
1–8. https://doi.org/10.1145/3347122.3347142
[105] Noura Howell, John Chuang, Abigail De Kosnik, Greg Niemeyer, and Kimiko
Ryokai. 2018. Emotional Biosensing: Exploring Critical Alternatives. Proceedings
of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 2, CSCW (Nov. 2018), 1–25. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3274338
[106] Alessandro Ianniello, Alessia Romani, and Francesca Casnati. 2022. Technol-
ogy toward more-than-human symbiosis: Critical reflections from the design
perspective. In Proceedings of the 25th International Academic Mindtrek Confer-
ence (Academic Mindtrek 2022, Vol. 7) . ACM, 158–166. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3569219.3569379
[107] Don Ihde. 1995. Postphenomenology: Essays in the postmodern context . North-
western University Press.
[108] Yuta Ikeya, Miguel Bruns, and Bahareh Barati. 2024. Designing for Inter-
dependence of Bees, Garden, Designer, and the Changing Season. In De-
signing Interactive Systems Conference (DIS ’24) . ACM, 1385–1399. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3643834.3660743
[109] Tim Ingold. 2021. Being alive: Essays on movement, knowledge and description .
Routledge.
[110] Lucija Ivsic, Nina Rajcic, Jon McCormack, and Vince Dziekan. 2021. The Art
of Point Clouds: 3D LiDAR Scanning and Photogrammetry in Science & Art.
In10th International Conference on Digital and Interactive Arts (ARTECH 2021) .
ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3483529.3483702
[111] Steven J. Jackson and Laewoo Kang. 2014. Breakdown, obsolescence and reuse:
HCI and the art of repair. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’14) . ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.
2557332
[112] Sylvia Janicki, Nassim Parvin, and Noura Howell. 2024. Crip Reflections on
Designing with Plants: Intersecting Disability Theory, Chronic Illness, and
More-than-Human Design. In Designing Interactive Systems Conference (DIS ’24) .
ACM, 1044–1058. https://doi.org/10.1145/3643834.3661509
[113] Sylvia Janicki, Alexandra Teixeira Riggs, Noura Howell, Anne Sullivan, and
Nassim Parvin. 2024. Sensing Bodies: Engaging Postcolonial Histories through
More-than-Human Interactions. In Proceedings of the Eighteenth International
Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied Interaction (TEI ’24, Vol. 5) .
ACM, 1–15. https://doi.org/10.1145/3623509.3633389
[114] Ian Jarvis and Doug Van Nort. 2018. Posthuman Gesture. In Proceedings of the
5th International Conference on Movement and Computing (MOCO ’18) . ACM,
1–8. https://doi.org/10.1145/3212721.3212807
[115] Mads Møller Jensen and Jesper Aagaard. 2018. A postphenomenological method
for HCI research. In Proceedings of the 30th Australian Conference on Computer-
Human Interaction (OzCHI ’18) . ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3292147.3292170
[116] Martin Jonsson and Jakob Tholander. 2022. Cracking the code: Co-coding with
AI in creative programming education. In Creativity and Cognition (C&C ’22) .
ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3527927.3532801
[117] Heekyoung Jung and Sookyung Cho. 2022. Methodological Reflections on Ways
of Seeing. In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’22,
Vol. 56) . ACM, 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1145/3491102.3517539
[118] Petra Jääskeläinen, André Holzapfel, and Cecilia Åsberg. 2022. Exploring More-
than-Human Caring in Creative-Ai Interactions. In Nordic Human-Computer
Interaction Conference (NordiCHI ’22, Vol. 14) . ACM, 1–7. https://doi.org/10.
1145/3546155.3547278
[119] Gopinaath Kannabiran and Anuradha Venugopal Reddy. 2022. Exploring Kolam
As An Ecofeminist Computational Art Practice. In Creativity and Cognition
(C&C ’22, Vol. 90) . ACM, 336–349. https://doi.org/10.1145/3527927.3531452
[120] Karlheinz Kautz and Melinda Plumb. 2016. Strong versus Weak Sociomateriality:
Neither Subordinate nor Privileged- A rejoinder to “New Technology and the
Post-human self: Rethinking Appropriation and Resistance”. ACM SIGMIS
Database: the DATABASE for Advances in Information Systems 47, 4 (Dec. 2016),34–40. https://doi.org/10.1145/3025099.3025103
[121] Cayla Key, Cally Gatehouse, and Nick Taylor. 2022. Feminist Care in the Anthro-
pocene: Packing and Unpacking Tensions in Posthumanist HCI. In Designing
Interactive Systems Conference (DIS ’22) . ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3532106.
3533540
[122] Sandjar Kozubaev and Noura Howell. 2024. “Tuning in and listening to the
current”: Understanding Remote Ritual Practice in Sufi Communities. In De-
signing Interactive Systems Conference (DIS ’24) . ACM, 2633–2648. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3643834.3661593
[123] Alinta Krauth. 2020. Making-with: Nonhuman Animal Inclusivity in an Elec-
tronic Literature Practice. In Proceedings of the Seventh International Confer-
ence on Animal-Computer Interaction (ACI’2020, Vol. 1) . ACM, 1–5. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3446002.3446051
[124] Cherie Lacey and Catherine Caudwell. 2019. Cuteness as a ‘Dark Pattern’ in
Home Robots. In 2019 14th ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot
Interaction (HRI) . IEEE. https://doi.org/10.1109/hri.2019.8673274
[125] Edgar Landgraf. 2023. Nietzsche’s posthumanism . U of Minnesota Press.
[126] Ricelli Laplace and Joel Peter Weber Letkemann. 2022. Science Fictioning
Participatory Design. In Participatory Design Conference 2022: Volume 1 (PDC
2022, Vol. 52) . ACM, 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1145/3536169.3537775
[127] Bruno Latour. 2004. Politics of nature . Harvard University Press.
[128] Bruno Latour. 2007. Reassembling the social: An introduction to actor-network-
theory . Oup Oxford.
[129] Kristina Lindström, Li Jönsson, and Per-Anders Hillgren. 2024. Reorientations:
Practicing Grief and Hope in Post-Carbon Futures. In Participatory Design
Conference 2024 (PDC ’24) . ACM, 187–196. https://doi.org/10.1145/3666094.
3666104
[130] Szu-Yu (Cyn) Liu, Shaowen Bardzell, and Jeffrey Bardzell. 2019. Symbiotic
Encounters: HCI and Sustainable Agriculture. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’19) . ACM. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300547
[131] Szu-Yu (Cyn) Liu, Justin Cranshaw, and Asta Roseway. 2020. Making Air Quality
Data Meaningful: Coupling Objective Measurement with Subjective Experience
through Narration. In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM Designing Interactive Systems
Conference (DIS ’20) . ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3357236.3395517
[132] Maya Livio and Laura Devendorf. 2022. The Eco-Technical Interface: Attuning
to the Instrumental. In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI ’22) . ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3491102.3501851
[133] P. Love. 2018. Rhetorically Defining “Information” For Designers and Technical
Communicators: Transport, Institutional Shift, and Usability. In Proceedings of
the 36th ACM International Conference on the Design of Communication (SIGDOC
’18, Vol. 6) . ACM, 1–7. https://doi.org/10.1145/3233756.3233945
[134] Alex Jiahong Lu, Shruti Sannon, Cameron Moy, Savana Brewer, Jaye Green,
Kisha N. Jackson, Daivon Reeder, Camaria Wafer, Mark S. Ackerman, and
Tawanna R. Dillahunt. 2023. Shifting from Surveillance-as-Safety to Safety-
through-Noticing: A Photovoice Study with Eastside Detroit Residents. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI ’23, Vol. 60) . ACM, 1–19. https://doi.org/10.1145/3544548.3581474
[135] Christina Lu, Jackie Kay, and Kevin McKee. 2022. Subverting machines, fluc-
tuating identities: Re-learning human categorization. In 2022 ACM Confer-
ence on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (FAccT ’22) . ACM. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3531146.3533161
[136] Deborah Lupton. 2014. Self-tracking cultures: towards a sociology of personal
informatics. In Proceedings of the 26th Australian Computer-Human Interaction
Conference on Designing Futures: the Future of Design (OzCHI ’14) . ACM. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/2686612.2686623
[137] Patricia MacCormack. 2017. Posthuman teratology. In The Ashgate research
companion to monsters and the monstrous . Routledge, 333–350.
[138] Thor Magnusson, Kit Braybrooke, Sophie Skach, Giacomo Lepri, Marco Don-
narumma, Adam Pultz Melbye, Jack Armitage, Victor Shepardson, Nicola Privato,
Miguel Angel Crozzoli, Halldor Ulfarsson, and Sean Patrick O’Brien. 2024. The
Organium: A Library of Technical Elements for Improvisatory Design Thinking.
InAudio Mostly 2024 - Explorations in Sonic Cultures (AM ’24) . ACM, 198–208.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3678299.3678319
[139] Tatu Marttila. 2011. Unpleasurable products and interfaces: provocative design
communication for sustainable society. In Proceedings of the 2011 Conference
on Designing Pleasurable Products and Interfaces (DPPI ’11) . ACM, 1–4. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/2347504.2347546
[140] Achille Mbembe. 2020. Necropolitics . Duke University Press.
[141] Avital Meshi. 2024. The New Vitruvian: Becoming-with an AI Recognition
Algorithm. In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Movement and
Computing (MOCO ’24) . ACM, 1–4. https://doi.org/10.1145/3658852.3658862
[142] Jessica R Mindel, Miles Baird, Allison Prisloe, Feifei Shen, Cherry Wu, Yang
Yi, and Hiroshi Ishii. 2023. Pull It Together: Textile Patina as an Interface for
Externalizing Invisible Tension. In Designing Interactive Systems Conference (DIS
’23). ACM, 232–236. https://doi.org/10.1145/3563703.3596638
[143] Landon Morrison and Andrew McPherson. 2024. Entangling Entanglement:
A Diffractive Dialogue on HCI and Musical Interactions. In Proceedings of the
520
COMPASS ’25, July 22–25, 2025, Toronto, ON, Canada Dedeoğlu and Chandra
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’24, Vol. 21) . ACM,
1–17. https://doi.org/10.1145/3613904.3642171
[144] Timothy Morton. 2013. She stood in tears amid the alien corn: Thinking through
agrilogistics. Diacritics 41, 3 (2013), 90–113.
[145] Timothy Morton. 2016. Dark ecology: For a logic of future coexistence . Columbia
University Press.
[146] Teoma J. Naccarato and John MacCallum. 2017. Critical Appropriations of
Biosensors in Artistic Practice. In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference
on Movement Computing (MOCO ’17) . ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3077981.
3078053
[147] Troy Nachtigall, Oscar Tomico, Ron Wakkary, and Pauline van Dongen. 2019.
Encoding Materials and Data for Iterative Personalization. In Proceedings of the
2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’19, Vol. 11) .
ACM, 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300749
[148] Pramod K. Nayar. 2014. Posthumanism . Polity.
[149] Ruth Neubauer. 2019. Reconfiguring Human-centred Design of Technology
as a Technohuman Intervention. In Proceedings of the Halfway to the Future
Symposium 2019 (HTTF 2019, Vol. 10) . ACM, 1–4. https://doi.org/10.1145/3363384.
3363473
[150] Quynh Nguyen, Julia Himmelsbach, Diotima Bertel, Olivia Zechner, and Man-
fred Tscheligi. 2022. What Is Meaningful Human-Computer Interaction? Under-
standing Freedom, Responsibility, and Noos in HCI Based on Viktor Frankl’s
Existential Philosophy. In Designing Interactive Systems Conference (DIS ’22,
Vol. 14) . ACM, 654–665. https://doi.org/10.1145/3532106.3533484
[151] Iohanna Nicenboim, Doenja Oogjes, Heidi Biggs, and Seowoo Nam. 2025. De-
centering through design: Bridging posthuman theory with more-than-human
design practices. Human–Computer Interaction 40, 1-4 (2025), 195–220.
[152] Greg Nijs, Giulietta Laki, Rafaella Houlstan, Guillaume Slizewicz, and Thomas
Laureyssens. 2020. Fostering More-than-Human Imaginaries: Introducing DIY
Speculative Fabulation in Civic HCI. In Proceedings of the 11th Nordic Conference
on Human-Computer Interaction: Shaping Experiences, Shaping Society (NordiCHI
’20, Vol. 10) . ACM, 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1145/3419249.3420147
[153] Charlotte Nordmoen and Andrew P. McPherson. 2022. Making space for material
entanglements: A diffractive analysis of woodwork and the practice of making
an interactive system. In Designing Interactive Systems Conference (DIS ’22) .
ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3532106.3533572
[154] Claudia Núñez-Pacheco and Anton Poikolainen Rosén. 2024. Articulating Felt
Senses for More-Than-Human Design: A Viewpoint for Noticing. In Designing
Interactive Systems Conference (DIS ’24) . ACM, 1029–1043. https://doi.org/10.
1145/3643834.3661554
[155] Netta Ofer and Mirela Alistar. 2023. Felt Experiences with Kombucha Scoby:
Exploring First-person Perspectives with Living Matter. In Proceedings of the
2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’23) . ACM,
1–18. https://doi.org/10.1145/3544548.3581276
[156] Netta Ofer and Mirela Alistar. 2024. Tracing as a Strategy for Orienting to
Nonhuman Perspectives. In Designing Interactive Systems Conference (DIS ’24) .
ACM, 1087–1100. https://doi.org/10.1145/3643834.3661621
[157] Lynda Olman and Danielle DeVasto. 2020. Hybrid collectivity: hacking en-
vironmental risk visualization for the anthropocene. Communication Design
Quarterly 8, 4 (Dec. 2020), 15–28. https://doi.org/10.1145/3431932.3431934
[158] Doenja Oogjes and Ron Wakkary. 2022. Weaving Stories: Toward Repertoires for
Designing Things. In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI ’22) . ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3491102.3501901
[159] Daniëlle Ooms, Bahareh Barati, Miguel Bruns, and Teresa van Dongen. 2022.
From Concern to Care: A Transformative Reflection on Designing-with the
Living. In Nordic Human-Computer Interaction Conference (NordiCHI ’22) . ACM.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3546155.3547285
[160] Jo Orsatti, Ella Hafermalz, and Dirk S. Hovorka. 2016. Rethinking, “Rethinking:
Post-Human Boundaries”: Pre-given or Performed? ACM SIGMIS Database:
the DATABASE for Advances in Information Systems 47, 4 (Dec. 2016), 41–44.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3025099.3025104
[161] Penny Papageorgopoulou, Dimitris Delinikolas, Natalia Arsenopoulou, Louiza
Katsarou, Charalampos Rizopoulos, Antonios Psaltis, Iouliani Theona, Alexan-
dros Drymonitis, Antonios Korosidis, and Dimitrios Charitos. 2021. Embedding
an interactive art installation into a building for enhancing citizen’s awareness
on urban environmental conditions. In Media Architecture Biennale 20 (MAB20) .
ACM, 160–169. https://doi.org/10.1145/3469410.3469426
[162] Robert Pepperell. 1995. The post-human condition: Consciousness beyond the
brain . Intellect Oxford.
[163] Robert Pepperell. 2002. Computer aided creativity: practical experience and
theoretical concerns. In Proceedings of the fourth conference on Creativity &
cognition - C&C ’02 (C&C ’02) . ACM Press, 50–56. https://doi.org/10.1145/
581710.581720
[164] James Pierce. 2012. Undesigning technology: considering the negation of de-
sign by design. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems . 957–966.
[165] Suvi Pihkala and Helena Karasti. 2018. Politics of mattering in the practices of
participatory design. In Proceedings of the 15th Participatory Design Conference:Short Papers, Situated Actions, Workshops and Tutorial - Volume 2 (PDC ’18,
Vol. 14) . ACM, 1–5. https://doi.org/10.1145/3210604.3210616
[166] Suvi Pihkala and Helena Karasti. 2022. Towards Response-able PD: Putting
Feminist New Materialisms to Work in the Practices of Participatory Design.
InParticipatory Design Conference 2022: Volume 1 (PDC 2022) . ACM. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3536169.3537784
[167] Sebastian Prost, Irina Pavlovskaya, Kahina Meziant, Vasilis Vlachokyriakos, and
Clara Crivellaro. 2021. Contact Zones: Designing for More-than-Human Food
Relations. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 5, CSCW1
(April 2021), 1–24. https://doi.org/10.1145/3449121
[168] Gavin Rae. 2014. Heidegger’s influence on posthumanism: The destruction of
metaphysics, technology and the overcoming of anthropocentrism. History of
the Human Sciences 27, 1 (2014), 51–69.
[169] Nina Rajcic, Maria Teresa Llano Rodriguez, and Jon McCormack. 2024. Towards
a Diffractive Analysis of Prompt-Based Generative AI. In Proceedings of the CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’24, Vol. 23) . ACM,
1–15. https://doi.org/10.1145/3613904.3641971
[170] Nina Rajcic and Jon McCormack. 2023. Message Ritual: A Posthuman Account
of Living with Lamp. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems (CHI ’23, Vol. 1) . ACM, 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3544548.3581363
[171] Vineetha Rallabandi, Alice C Haynes, Courtney N. Reed, and Paul Strohmeier.
2024. Base and Stitch: Evaluating eTextile Interfaces from a Material-Centric
View. In Proceedings of the Eighteenth International Conference on Tangible,
Embedded, and Embodied Interaction (TEI ’24, Vol. 9) . ACM, 1–13. https://doi.
org/10.1145/3623509.3633363
[172] Neil Ramiller. 2016. New Technology and the Post-human Self: Rethinking Ap-
propriation and Resistance. ACM SIGMIS Database: the DATABASE for Advances
in Information Systems 47, 4 (Dec. 2016), 23–33. https://doi.org/10.1145/3025099.
3025102
[173] Courtney N. Reed, Landon Morrison, Andrew P. McPherson, David Fierro, and
Atau Tanaka. 2024. Sonic Entanglements with Electromyography: Between
Bodies, Signals, and Representations. In Designing Interactive Systems Conference
(DIS ’24) . ACM, 2691–2707. https://doi.org/10.1145/3643834.3661572
[174] Nicole Robson, Andrew McPherson, and Nick Bryan-Kinns. 2024. Thinking with
Sound: Exploring the Experience of Listening to an Ultrasonic Art Installation.
InProceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI ’24, Vol. 4) . ACM, 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1145/3613904.3642616
[175] Shannon Rodgers, Bernd Ploderer, Kellie Vella, and Margot Brereton. 2022. Phe-
nology Probes: Exploring Human-Nature Relations for Designing Sustainable
Futures. In Proceedings of the 34th Australian Conference on Human-Computer
Interaction (OzCHI ’22) . ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3572921.3572936
[176] Shannon Rodgers, Kellie Vella, Bernd Ploderer, and Margot Brereton. 2023.
Nature Fictions: Designing for a Sustainable Future through Nature Relations.
InProceedings of the 2023 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference (DIS
’23). ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3563657.3595981
[177] Margrete Lodahl Rolighed, Ester Marie Aagaard, Marcus Due Jensen, Raune
Frankjaer, and Lone Koefoed Hansen. 2022. Plant Radio: Tuning in to plants by
combining posthumanism and design. In Designing Interactive Systems Confer-
ence (DIS ’22, Vol. 1) . ACM, 666–676. https://doi.org/10.1145/3532106.3533517
[178] Emma J. Rose and Rebecca Walton. 2015. Factors to actors: implications of
posthumanism for social justice work. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual In-
ternational Conference on the Design of Communication (SIGDOC ’15) . ACM.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2775441.2775464
[179] Robert Rosenberger and Peter PCC Verbeek. 2015. Postphenomenological inves-
tigations: Essays on human-technology relations . Lexington Books.
[180] Karin Ryding, Vasiliki Tsaknaki, Stina Marie Hasse Jørgensen, and Jonas Fritsch.
2023. Lydspor: An Urban sound experience weaving together past and present
through vibrating bodies. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’23, Vol. 3) . ACM, 1–16. https://doi.org/10.
1145/3544548.3581523
[181] Yaara Sadetzki and Orit Hirsch-Matsioulas. 2021. Leashing the City: Dog-Leash-
Human Entanglements and the Urban Space. In Eight International Conference
on Animal-Computer Interaction (ACI’21) . ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3493842.
3493889
[182] Erik Sandelin and Sarah Homewood. 2020. Design (In)actions. In Proceedings of
the 11th Nordic Conference on Human-Computer Interaction: Shaping Experiences,
Shaping Society (NordiCHI ’20) . ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3419249.3420172
[183] Vishal Sharma, Neha Kumar, and Bonnie Nardi. 2023. Post-growth Hu-
man–Computer Interaction. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction
31, 1 (Nov. 2023), 1–37. https://doi.org/10.1145/3624981
[184] Hira Sheikh, Kavita Gonsalves, and Marcus Foth. 2021. Plant(e)tecture: Towards
a Multispecies Media Architecture Framework for amplifying Plant Agencies.
InMedia Architecture Biennale 20 (MAB20, Vol. 30) . ACM, 87–99. https://doi.
org/10.1145/3469410.3469419
[185] M. Six Silberman, Lisa Nathan, Bran Knowles, Roy Bendor, Adrian Clear, Maria
Håkansson, Tawanna Dillahunt, and Jennifer Mankoff. 2014. Next steps for
sustainable HCI. Interactions 21, 5 (2014), 66–69.
521
Navigating the Posthuman Turn in Computing and Design: A Posthuman Vocabulary COMPASS ’25, July 22–25, 2025, Toronto, ON, Canada
[186] Linda Tuhiwai Smith et al .2019. Decolonizing research: Indigenous storywork as
methodology . Bloomsbury Publishing.
[187] Nancy Smith, Shaowen Bardzell, and Jeffrey Bardzell. 2017. Designing for
Cohabitation: Naturecultures, Hybrids, and Decentering the Human in Design.
InProceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI ’17) . ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025948
[188] Hannah Snyder. 2019. Literature review as a research methodology: An overview
and guidelines. Journal of Business Research 104 (2019), 333–339.
[189] Robert Soden, Pradnaya Pathak, and Olivia Doggett. 2021. What We Speculate
About When We Speculate About Sustainable HCI. In ACM SIGCAS Conference
on Computing and Sustainable Societies (COMPASS) (COMPASS ’21) . ACM. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3460112.3471956
[190] Julian Stadon and Raphael Grasset. 2011. Syncretic Post-Biological Digital Iden-
tity: Hybridizing Mixed Reality Data Transfer Systems. In 2011 IEEE/ACM 15th
International Symposium on Distributed Simulation and Real Time Applications ,
Vol. 2 1. IEEE, 120–125. https://doi.org/10.1109/ds-rt.2011.28
[191] Anna Ståhl, Madeline Balaam, Rob Comber, Pedro Sanches, and Kristina Höök.
2022. Making New Worlds – Transformative Becomings with Soma Design.
InCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’22) . ACM.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3491102.3502018
[192] Prophecy Sun, Shannon Cuykendall, Kristin Carlson, Maria Lantin, and Thecla
Schiphorst. 2016. spaceDisplaced: Investigating Presence Through Mediated
Participatory Environments. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Symposium
on Movement and Computing (MOCO’16, Vol. 3) . ACM, 1–6. https://doi.org/10.
1145/2948910.2948945
[193] Steve Symons. 2024. The Perceptron: A Multi-player Entangled Instrument based
on Interpretive Mapping and Intra-action.. In Audio Mostly 2024 - Explorations in
Sonic Cultures (AM ’24) . ACM, 385–391. https://doi.org/10.1145/3678299.3678338
[194] Marie Louise Juul Søndergaard and Nadia Campo Woytuk. 2023. Feminist
Posthumanist Design of Menstrual Care for More-than-Human Bodies. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI ’23, Vol. 9) . ACM, 1–18. https://doi.org/10.1145/3544548.3581083
[195] Marie Louise Juul Søndergaard, Nadia Campo Woytuk, Noura Howell, Vasiliki
Tsaknaki, Karey Helms, Tom Jenkins, and Pedro Sanches. 2023. Fabulation as
an Approach for Design Futuring. In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM Designing
Interactive Systems Conference (DIS ’23) . ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3563657.
3596097
[196] Marc Teyssier, Marion Koelle, Paul Strohmeier, Bruno Fruchard, and Jürgen
Steimle. 2021. Eyecam: Revealing Relations between Humans and Sensing
Devices through an Anthropomorphic Webcam. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’21, Vol. 4) . ACM, 1–13.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445491
[197] Jakob Tholander and Martin Jonsson. 2023. Design Ideation with AI - Sketching,
Thinking and Talking with Generative Machine Learning Models. In Proceedings
of the 2023 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference (DIS ’23) . ACM. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3563657.3596014
[198] Oscar Tomico, Anton Poikolainen Rosén, Svenja Keune, Ferran Altarriba Bertran,
Danielle Wilde, Daniel Fernández Galeote, Tau Ulv Lenskjold, Ruut Tikkanen,
Oğuz ’Oz Buruk, and Velvet Spors. 2024. Seeding a Repository of Methods-
To-Be for Nature-Entangled Design Research. In Designing Interactive Systems
Conference (DIS ’24) . ACM, 1101–1115. https://doi.org/10.1145/3643834.3660745
[199] Giovanni Maria Troiano, Matthew Wood, and Casper Harteveld. 2020. “And This,
Kids, Is How I Met Your Mother”: Consumerist, Mundane, and Uncanny Futures
with Sex Robots. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (CHI ’20) . ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376598
[200] Anna Lowenhaupt Tsing. 2015. The Mushroom at the End of the World: On the
Possibility of Life in Capitalist Ruins . Princeton University Press.
[201] Eve Tuck, Marcia McKenzie, and Kate McCoy. 2014. Land education: Indige-
nous, post-colonial, and decolonizing perspectives on place and environmental
education research. Environmental Education Research 20, 1 (2014), 1–23.
[202] Laia Turmo Vidal, José Manuel Vega-Cebrián, Amar D’Adamo, Marte Roel Lesur,
Mohammad Mahdi Dehshibi, Joaquín Díaz Durán, and Ana Tajadura-Jiménez.
2023. On Futuring Body Perception Transformation Technologies: Roles, Goals
and Values. In 26th International Academic Mindtrek Conference (Mindtrek ’23,
Vol. 8) . ACM, 169–181. https://doi.org/10.1145/3616961.3616991
[203] Peter-Paul Verbeek. 2015. COVER STORY beyond interaction: a short introduc-
tion to mediation theory. Interactions 22, 3 (2015), 26–31.
[204] Lorella Viola. 2023. Networks of Migrants’ Narratives: A Post-authentic Ap-
proach to Heritage Visualisation. Journal on Computing and Cultural Heritage
16, 1 (March 2023), 1–21. https://doi.org/10.1145/3575863
[205] Ron Wakkary. 2020. Nomadic practices: A posthuman theory for knowing
design. International Journal of Design 14, 3 (2020), 117.
[206] Ron Wakkary. 2021. Things we could design: For more than human-centered
worlds . MIT press.
[207] Ron Wakkary, Audrey Desjardins, Sabrina Hauser, and Leah Maestri. 2013. A
sustainable design fiction: Green practices. ACM Transactions on Computer-
Human Interaction (TOCHI) 20, 4 (2013), 1–34.[208] Ron Wakkary, Doenja Oogjes, and Armi Behzad. 2022. Two Years or More
of Co-speculation: Polylogues of Philosophers, Designers, and a Tilting Bowl.
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction 29, 5 (Oct. 2022), 1–44. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3514235
[209] Hannah Walter, Eric Larrieux, Robert Torche, Cedric Spindler, and Patrick Müller.
2024. NEXUS: A Tangible Multi-User Sensor-Based Telematic Novel Mixing-
Interface for Multimedial Exploration. In Audio Mostly 2024 - Explorations in
Sonic Cultures (AM ’24) . ACM, 245–259. https://doi.org/10.1145/3678299.3678323
[210] Josephine N. Walwema. 2012. Designing with templates in instructional design.
InProceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Design of commu-
nication (SIGDOC 2012, Vol. 19) . ACM, 17–22. https://doi.org/10.1145/2379057.
2379061
[211] Michelle Westerlaken and Stefano Gualeni. 2016. Becoming with: towards the
inclusion of animals as participants in design processes. In Proceedings of the
Third International Conference on Animal-Computer Interaction (ACI ’16) . ACM.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2995257.2995392
[212] Kyle Whyte. 2020. Indigenous environmental justice: Anti-colonial action
through kinship. In Environmental justice . Routledge, 266–278.
[213] Ryan Wittingslow. 2012. What does it mean to be enhanced?. In Proceedings of
the 2012 Virtual Reality International Conference (VRIC ’12, Vol. 19) . ACM, 1–9.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2331714.2331724
[214] Cary Wolfe. 2017. Posthumanism Thinks the Political: A Genealogy for Fou-
cault’s The Birth of Biopolitics. Journal of Posthuman Studies 1, 2 (2017), 117–135.
[215] Rewa Wright and Simon Howden. 2023. Exploring the Eco-Digital: Performative
Sensing with Plants and Data. In SIGGRAPH Asia 2023 Art Papers (SA ’23) . ACM,
1–4. https://doi.org/10.1145/3610591.3616428
[216] Bieke Zaman, Maarten Van Mechelen, and Lizzy Bleumers. 2018. When toys
come to life: considering the internet of toys from an animistic design perspec-
tive. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Interaction Design and Children
(IDC ’18, Vol. 2) . ACM, 170–180. https://doi.org/10.1145/3202185.3202745
[217] Jiwei Zhou, Zjenja Doubrovski, Elisa Giaccardi, and Elvin Karana. 2024. Living
with Cyanobacteria: Exploring Materiality in Caring for Microbes in Everyday
Life. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI ’24, Vol. 9) . ACM, 1–20. https://doi.org/10.1145/3613904.3642039
[218] Marine Zorea and Katsuhiko Kushi. 2024. All Is Heard: Reimagining The Sounds
of Home With Care. In Designing Interactive Systems Conference (DIS ’24) . ACM,
2708–2718. https://doi.org/10.1145/3643834.3660686
522
COMPASS ’25, July 22–25, 2025, Toronto, ON, Canada Dedeoğlu and Chandra
A Corpus of Papers with Classifications
Paper Title Conference YearPosthumanist
PrinciplesEco, Tech,
or Both
Computer aided creativity: practical experience and theo-
retical concerns [163]C&C 2002 PA T
Constituting, traversing and perforating boundaries: em-
bodied interaction in immersive virtual spaces [82]C&C 2005 PA, PD T
Syncretic Post-Biological Digital Identity: Hybridizing
Mixed Reality Data Transfer Systems [190]DS-RT 2011 PA T
Unpleasurable products and interfaces [139] DPPI 2011 PA B
What does it mean to be enhanced? [213] VRIC 2012 PA, PD T
Designing with templates in instructional design [210] SIGDOC 2012 PA T
Stories of the Smartphone in everyday discourse: conflict,
tension & instability [94]CHI 2013 PA T
Breakdown, obsolescence and reuse: HCI and the art of
repair [111]CHI 2014 PA, PD T
Object intermediaries: How New Media Artists Translate
the Language of Things [6]SIGGRAPH 2014 PA, PD B
Transmission: A Telepresence Interface for Neural and Ki-
netic Interaction [85]SIGGRAPH 2014 PA T
Self-tracking cultures: Towards a sociology of personal in-
formatics [136]OzCHI 2014 PH, PA, PD T
Smelling, pulling, and looking [8] ACE 2015 PA E
Factors to actors: implications of posthumanism for social
justice work [178]SIGDOC 2015 PH, PA T
Probing the Potential of Post-Anthropocentric 3D Printing
[57]DIS 2016 PA T
Plant-computer interaction, beauty and dissemination [9] ACI 2016 PA E
Becoming with: Towards the Inclusion of Animals as Par-
ticipants in Design Processes [211]ACI 2016 PA, PD E
spaceDisplaced: Investigating Presence Through Mediated
Participatory Environments [192]MOCO 2016 PA T
Doing Sociomateriality Research in Information Systems
[67]SIGMIS 2016 PA, PD T
Negotiating "Messy" Research Context and Design Through
Adaptive Research Stances: Experience Report [5]SIGDOC 2016 PA T
New Technology and the Post-human Self: Rethinking Ap-
propriation and Resistance [172]SIGMIS 2016 PA, PD T
Rethinking, "Rethinking: Post-Human Boundaries": Pre-
given or Performed? [160]SIGMIS 2016 PA, PD T
Strong versus Weak Sociomateriality: Neither Subordinate
nor Privileged- A rejoinder to "New Technology and the
Post-human self: Rethinking Appropriation and Resistance"
[120]SIGMIS 2016 PA, PD T
Critical Realism as a Sociomaterial Stream of Research [ 49]SIGMIS 2016 PA, PD T
Editorial: A Brief History of the Material in Sociomateriality
[96]SIGMIS 2016 PA, PD T
523
Navigating the Posthuman Turn in Computing and Design: A Posthuman Vocabulary COMPASS ’25, July 22–25, 2025, Toronto, ON, Canada
Designing for Cohabitation: Naturecultures, Hybrids, and
Decentering the Human in Design [187]CHI 2017 PA, PD E
Post-userism [15] CHI 2017 PH, PD, PE T
Manifesting the Cyborg through Techno-Body Modification:
From Human-Computer Interaction to Integration [34]CHI 2017 PA, PD T
Movement Matters: How a Robot Becomes Body [83] MOCO 2017 PA, PD T
Critical Appropriations of Biosensors in Artistic Practice
[146]MOCO 2017 PA, PD T
To whom does the driver’s seat belong in the future? [36] GenderIT 2018 PH, PA, PD T
When toys come to life: Considering the internet of toys
from an animistic design perspective [216]IDC 2018 PA, PD T
Posthuman Gesture [114] MOCO 2018 PA, PD T
Emotional Biosensing: Exploring Critical Alternatives [ 105]CSCW 2018 PA, PD T
A postphenomenological method for HCI research [115] OzCHI 2018 PD T
Rewilding Wearables: Sympoeitic Interfaces for Empathic
Experience of Other-than-human Entities [74]TEI 2018 PA, PD B
Politics of mattering in the practices of participatory design
[165]PDC 2018 PD T
Rhetorically Defining ’Information’ For Designers and Tech-
nical Communicators: Transport, Institutional Shift, and
Usability [133]SIGDOC 2018 PE T
Multimodal conversation analysis and usability studies [ 45]CDQ 2018 PA, PD T
Encoding Materials and Data for Iterative Personalization
[147]CHI 2019 PA T
Symbiotic Encounters: HCI and Sustainable Agriculture
[130]CHI 2019 PA, PD E
Cuteness as a ’dark pattern’ in home robots [124] HRI 2019 PD T
Reconfiguring Human-centred Design of Technology as a
Technohuman Intervention [149]HTTF 2019 PA, PD T
Performance, Art, and Cyber-Interoceptive Systems (PACIS)
[104]MOCO 2019 PA, PD T
Redesigning audiences in technical communication [80] SIGDOC 2019 PA T
Entanglement HCI The Next Wave? [78] TOCHI 2019PH, PA, PD, PE,
PTB
And This, Kids, Is How I Met Your Mother: Consumerist,
Mundane, and Uncanny Futures with Sex Robots [199]CHI 2020 PA, PD T
Monsters, Metaphors, and Machine Learning [65] CHI 2020 PH T
IoT Data in the Home: Observing Entanglements and Draw-
ing New Encounters [56]CHI 2020 PA T
Making Air Quality Data Meaningful: Coupling Objective
Measurement with Subjective Experience through Narra-
tion [131]DIS 2020 PH, PA, PD, PT B
Removal as a Method: a Fourth Wave HCI Approach to
Understanding the Experience of Self-Tracking [103]DIS 2020 PH, PD T
Fostering More-than-Human Imaginaries: Introducing DIY
Speculative Fabulation in Civic HCI [152]NordiCHI 2020 PA E
524
COMPASS ’25, July 22–25, 2025, Toronto, ON, Canada Dedeoğlu and Chandra
Design (In)actions [182] NordiCHI 2020 PA, PT E
Knowledge-creation Processes in Crafts-based HCI Re-
search: Introducing a Sympoietic Framework [77]NordiCHI 2020 PA, PD T
Making-with: Nonhuman Animal Inclusivity in an Elec-
tronic Literature Practice [123]ACI 2020 PA, PD T
Piracy and the Impaired Cyborg: Assistive Technologies,
Accessibility, and Access [40]CSCW 2020 PH, PA T
Expanding Participation to Design with More-Than-Human
Concerns [2]PDC 2020 PA, PD E
Hybrid collectivity: Hacking environmental risk visualiza-
tion for the anthropocene [157]CDQ 2020 PA, PD B
Watching Myself Watching Birds: Abjection, Ecological
Thinking, and Posthuman Design [26]CHI 2021 PA, PD E
Algorithmic Food Justice: Co-Designing More-than-Human
Blockchain Futures for the Food Commons [98]CHI 2021 PH, PA E
Tracing Conceptions of the Body in HCI: From User to
More-Than-Human [101]CHI 2021 PH, PA, PD B
Machine Learning Uncertainty as a Design Material: A Post-
Phenomenological Inquiry [19]CHI 2021 PD T
Wanting To Live Here: Design After Anthropocentric Func-
tionalism [14]CHI 2021 PH, PA E
Eyecam: Revealing Relations between Humans and Sensing
Devices through an Anthropomorphic Webcam [196]CHI 2021 PD T
Entangled Reflections on Designing with Leaky Breastfeed-
ing Bodies [99]DIS 2021 PA, PD T
What We Speculate About When We Speculate About Sus-
tainable HCI [189]COMPASS 2021 PA E
Circular Species [63] IDC 2021 PA, PD E
Transient Pattern – the Model of Digital Layout [86] ARTECH 2021 PA, PD T
Embedding an interactive art installation into a building
for enhancing citizen’s awareness on urban environmental
conditions [161]MAB 2021 PA, PD T
Plant(e)tecture: Towards a Multispecies Media Architecture
Framework for amplifying Plant Agencies [184]MAB 2021 PA B
Leashing the City: Dog-Leash-Human Entanglements and
the Urban Space [181]ACI 2021 PA, PD, PE E
The Art of Point Clouds: 3D LiDAR Scanning and Pho-
togrammetry in Science & Art [110]ARTECH 2021 PA, PD T
Alternatives to Agrilogistics: Designing for Ecological
Thinking [23]CHI 2021 PA, PD E
Contact Zones: Designing for More-than-Human Food Re-
lations [167]CSCW 2021 PH, PA, PD E
Interrogating Alexa: Holding Voice Assistants Accountable
for Their Answers [100]SIGDOC 2021 PD T
Deep mapping for environmental communication design
[37]CDQ 2021 PA, PD E
525
Navigating the Posthuman Turn in Computing and Design: A Posthuman Vocabulary COMPASS ’25, July 22–25, 2025, Toronto, ON, Canada
Cracking the code: Co-coding with AI in creative program-
ming education [116]C&C 2022 PA, PD, PE T
Exploring Kolam As An Ecofeminist Computational Art
Practice [119]C&C 2022 PA, PD E
Methodological Reflections on Ways of Seeing [117] CHI 2022 PA, PD T
Making New Worlds – Transformative Becomings with
Soma Design [191]CHI 2022 PA, PD T
The Eco-Technical Interface: Attuning to the Instrumental
[132]CHI 2022 PA, PD E
Weaving Stories: Toward Repertoires for Designing Things
[158]CHI 2022 PA, PD, PE, PT B
Patterns and Opportunities for the Design of Human-Plant
Interaction [41]DIS 2022 PA E
What Is Meaningful Human-Computer Interaction? Under-
standing Freedom, Responsibility, and Noos in HCI Based
on Viktor Frankl’s Existential Philosophy [150]DIS 2022 PH T
Plant Radio: Tuning in to plants by combining posthuman-
ism and design [177]DIS 2022 PA, PD, PE B
Feminist Care in the Anthropocene: Packing and Unpacking
Tensions in Posthumanist HCI [121]DIS 2022 PH, PA, PD, PE E
Making space for material entanglements: A diffractive anal-
ysis of woodwork and the practice of making an interactive
system [153]DIS 2022 PA, PD T
From Concern to Care: A Transformative Reflection on
Designing-with the Living [159]NordiCHI 2022 PA, PD E
Exploring More-than-Human Caring in Creative-Ai Inter-
actions [118]NordiCHI 2022PH, PA, PD, PE,
PTB
Me, the Hill and My Browser – Investigating the Role of
Time in Posthuman Interaction [44]NordiCHI 2022 PA, PD, PE B
The Problem(s) of Caring for the Commons [79] NordiCHI 2022 PA, PD E
Phenology Probes: Exploring Human-Nature Relations for
Designing Sustainable Futures [175]OzCHI 2022 PA, PD E
Technology toward more-than-human symbiosis: Critical
reflections from the design perspective [106]Mindtrek 2022PH, PA, PD, PE,
PTB
Subverting machines, fluctuating identities: Re-learning hu-
man categorization [135]FAccT 2022 PD T
Science Fictioning Participatory Design [126] PDC 2022 PD E
Towards Response-able PD: Putting Feminist New Mate-
rialisms to Work in the Practices of Participatory Design
[166]PDC 2022 PH, PA, PD T
Would the Trees Dim the Lights? Adopting the Intentional
Stance for More-Than-Human Participatory Design [47]PDC 2022 PA E
Two Years or More of Co-speculation: Polylogues of Philoso-
phers, Designers, and a Tilting Bowl [208]TOCHI 2022 PA, PD T
Feminist Posthumanist Design of Menstrual Care for More-
than-Human Bodies [194]CHI 2023 PH, PA E
526
COMPASS ’25, July 22–25, 2025, Toronto, ON, Canada Dedeoğlu and Chandra
AdaCAD: Parametric Design as a New Form of Notation
for Complex Weaving [58]CHI 2023 PA, PD T
Felt Experiences with Kombucha Scoby: Exploring First-
person Perspectives with Living Matter [155]CHI 2023 PA, PD, PE E
Message Ritual: A Posthuman Account of Living with Lamp
[170]CHI 2023 PA, PD T
Redlining Maps and Terrains of Sustainability: Interdisci-
plinary Mapping of Racialized Redlining to Present-Day
Sustainability Agendas in HCI [25]CHI 2023PH, PA, PD, PE,
PTB
Lydspor: An Urban Sound Experience Weaving Together
Past and Present Through Vibrating Bodies [180]CHI 2023 PA, PD T
What is Human-Centered about Human-Centered AI? A
Map of the Research Landscape [38]CHI 2023 PA T
Three Design Directions for a Diversity Computing Design
Space [69]CHI 2023 PH T
Shifting from Surveillance-as-Safety to Safety-through-
Noticing: A Photovoice Study with Eastside Detroit Res-
idents [134]CHI 2023 PH, PA T
HCI Research on Agriculture: Competing Sociotechnical
Imaginaries, Definitions, and Opportunities [64]CHI 2023 PA E
Design Ideation with AI - Sketching, Thinking and Talking
with Generative Machine Learning Models [197]DIS 2023 PA, PD T
Pull It Together: Textile Patina as an Interface for External-
izing Invisible Tension [142]DIS 2023 PA T
Fabulation as an Approach for Design Futuring [195] CHI 2023 PH, PA T
Nature Fictions: Designing for a Sustainable Future through
Nature Relations [176]DIS 2023 PA E
ARECA: A Design Speculation on Everyday Products Hav-
ing Minds [43]DIS 2023 PA, PE T
Designing and Using the Wild Probes Toolkit (v1) to Co-
Design From-the-Wild [4]DIS 2023 PA E
TikTok as a Stage: Performing Rural #farmqueer Utopias
on TikTok [24]CHI 2023 PH E
Unusual suspects - visualizing unusual relationships of com-
plex social phenomena with climate change [39]GoodIT 2023 PH, PA B
On Futuring Body Perception Transformation Technologies:
Roles, Goals and Values [202]Mindtrek 2023 PA, PD T
Networks of Migrants’ Narratives: A Post-authentic Ap-
proach to Heritage Visualisation [204]JOCCH 2023 PD T
Exploring the Eco-Digital: Performative Sensing with Plants
and Data [215]SIGGRAPH 2023 PA, PD, PE B
A Practice-Based Approach to Post-Human Computer In-
teraction: Design Notes from Nature Scenes [35]TEI 2023 PH, PA B
SCOBY BREASTPLATE: SLOWLY GROWING A MICRO-
BIAL INTERFACE [17]TEI 2023 PA, PT B
Speculative Histories, Just Futures: From Counterfactual
Artifacts to Counterfactual Actions [76]TOCHI 2023 PH, PD T
527
Navigating the Posthuman Turn in Computing and Design: A Posthuman Vocabulary COMPASS ’25, July 22–25, 2025, Toronto, ON, Canada
Post-growth Human–Computer Interaction [183] TOCHI 2023 PH, PA E
Entangling Entanglement: A Diffractive Dialogue on HCI
and Musical Interactions [143]CHI 2024 PH, PA, PE T
Living with Cyanobacteria: Exploring Materiality in Caring
for Microbes in Everyday Life [217]CHI 2024 PA, PD E
Towards a Diffractive Analysis of Prompt-Based Generative
AI [169]CHI 2024 PA, PD T
Thinking with Sound: Exploring the Experience of Listening
to an Ultrasonic Art Installation [174]CHI 2024 PA T
Shape-Changing Clay-Dough: Taking a Material-Oriented
Approach to 3D Printing Ceramic Forms [18]CHI 2024 PA T
Thrown from Normative Ground: Exploring the Potential
of Disorientation as a Critical Methodological Strategy in
HCI [22]CHI 2024 PH, PA B
Microbial Revolt: Redefining biolab tools and practices for
more-than-human care ecologies [42]CHI 2024 PA E
Technologically Mediated Experiences of Visitors to the
Frederic Chopin Museum: Postphenomenological Perspec-
tive on Touchscreens Affordances [66]JOCCH 2024 PA T
Base and Stitch: Evaluating eTextile Interfaces from a
Material-Centric View [171]TEI 2024 PA T
Sensing Bodies: Engaging Postcolonial Histories through
More-than-Human Interactions [113]TEI 2024 PA, PD E
Algorithmic Subjectivities [16] TOCHI 2024 PA, PD, PE T
Encountering Human-Plant Relations: a Discussion of How
Interaction Design Can encourage Human Sensibility to
More-than-human Plants [88]DIS 2024 PA, PE B
Articulating Felt Senses for More-Than-Human Design: A
Viewpoint for Noticing [154]DIS 2024 PA, PD E
The Organium: A Library of Technical Elements for Impro-
visatory Design Thinking [138]AM 2024 PA, PD T
Seeding a Repository of Methods-To-Be for Nature-
Entangled Design Research [198]DIS 2024 PA, PD E
Crip Reflections on Designing with Plants: Intersecting Dis-
ability Theory, Chronic Illness, and More-than-Human De-
sign [112]DIS 2024 PA, PD E
Designing for Interdependence of Bees, Garden, Designer,
and the Changing Season [108]DIS 2024 PA, PD, PE, PT E
Sonic Entanglements with Electromyography: Between Bod-
ies, Signals, and Representations [173]DIS 2024 PA, PD T
All Is Heard: Reimagining The Sounds of Home With Care
[218]DIS 2024 PA T
Tracing as a Strategy for Orienting to Nonhuman Perspec-
tives [156]DIS 2024 PA E
NEXUS: A Tangible Multi-User Sensor-Based Telematic
Novel Mixing-Interface for Multimedial Exploration [209]AM 2024 PA, PD T
Reorientations: Practicing Grief and Hope in Post-Carbon
Futures [129]PDC 2024 PH, PA, PD, PE E
528
COMPASS ’25, July 22–25, 2025, Toronto, ON, Canada Dedeoğlu and Chandra
Dear Nature: Using data drawings to promote sensemaking
in human-nature relations [72]DIS 2024 PH, PA, PD, PE E
The New Vitruvian: Becoming-with an AI Recognition Al-
gorithm [141]MOCO 2024 PH, PD T
"Tuning in and listening to the current": Understanding
Remote Ritual Practice in Sufi Communities [122]DIS 2024 PH, PD T
Millipath: Bridging Materialist Theory and System Devel-
opment for Surface Texture Fabrication [30]DIS 2024 PA, PD T
Towards Relatable Climate Change Data: Untangling Ten-
sions in Engaging with a Hyperobject [73]DIS 2024 PA E
The Perceptron: A Multi-player Entangled Instrument based
on Interpretive Mapping and Intra-action. [193]AM 2024 PA, PD T
Embodied Traces: Multispecies Entanglement in Urban
Spaces [29]DIS 2024 PA. PD E
529
