    
      
    
   
   
        
  
   
        
     
       
       
       
    
     
     
        
      
     
      
  
    
   
         
      
   
       
     
     
   Human-Robot Experience (HRX) Theatre—An 
Interdisciplinary Methodology For Reimagining  
Human-Robot Relationships Through Movement   
Petra Gemeinboeck   
Center  for  Transformative  Media 
Technology  (CTMT )  
Swinburne University of  Technology  
Melbourne,  Australia  
pgemeinboeck@swin.edu.au  Rob  Saunders  
Leiden Inst itute  of  Advanced Computer  
Science  (LIACS)  
Leiden University  
Leiden,  Netherlands  
r.saunders@liacs.leidenuniv.nl  Audrey  Rochette   
Dance  Department  
Université  du  Québec  à  Montréal  
Montreal,  Canada  
rochette.audrey@yahoo.ca 
Steph Hutchison  
School  of  Creative Arts  
Queensland  University  of  Technology  
Brisbane,  Australia  
s2.hutchison@qut.edu.au  Kristina  Mah  
Design  Lab  
The  University  of  Sydney  
Sydney,  Australia  
kristina.mah@sydney.edu.au 
Abstract —  How  can  we  connect  with  robots  without  mimicking  
human traits?  Can we  build meaningful  relationships  with 
nonhuman- like  bodies?  What  if  sociality  emerges  in  the  encounter  
itself?  The  Human -Robot  Experience  (HRX)  Theatre  tutorial  
introduces  a  participatory  methodology  for  reimagining  our  
relationships  with robots  through movement -based,  experience -
centered exploration.  Participants  will  explore  how  we  bodily  
resonate and  make meaning  with  non-anthropomorphic  machines  
using  our  Relational  Body  Mapping  (RBM)  method,  employing  
robot  costumes  to  facilitate  embodied  perspective -taking.  
Adopting  a  robot's  unique  perspective  to  experience  its  distinct  
social  affordances expands our  understanding  beyond  
anthropocentric  views,  unlocking new  modes  of  nonverbal  
communication  and  embodied  empathy.  Movement  and its  
meaning -making  potential  are  key  to  HRX.  We  begin  with  gentle  
movement  explorations.  This h  eightened  sensitivity  will  shape  our  
first embodied  dialogues  with  artifacts.  A  live  performance  with  
dancers,  costumes,  and a  robot  will  showcase  how  RBM  harn esses  
kinesthetic  awareness  to  explore  how  sociality  arises  in  the  
encounter.  Applying  their embodied  insights,  participants  will  
develop and  enact  inclusive  speculative  scenarios  through  
embodied  role-play  with robot  costumes.  This  tutorial  introduces  
an  embodied  prototyping approach  that  leverages  the  potential  of  
movement  dynamics  for  designing  expressive,  nonhumanlike  
robots.  Cultivating  empathy  with  machinelike  entities  could  
promote  the  design of  more  diverse  and sustainable  relationships  
that recogni ze and  leverage the differences  between  humans  and  
robots.  No  prior  dance  experience  is  required; participants  will  
engage at  their own  comfort  level.  Join  us  to  explore the 
transformative  potential  of movement in  reimagining  our  robotic  
futures! Supported by  the  Australian Government  through the  
Australian  Research  Council  (FT190100567).  
Keywords —Human -Robot  Experience  (HRX),  embodied  
prototyping,  kinesthetic  attunement,  non- anthropomorphic  robot  
design ,  social  agency,  Relational  Body  Mapping  (RBM)  
This  tutorial  is  supported  by  the  Australian  Government  through  the  
Australian  Research  Council  (FT190100567).    
.  I.  INTRODUCTION  
Recent advances in generative AI open up new pos sibilities 
for social robots, promising more sophisticated human -robot 
interactions through enhanced communication, emotional 
intelligence, adaptive behaviors, and personalization [1]. 
However, these developments often focus on making robots 
more h umanlike, effectively masking the “deep asymmetries” 
between humans and machines [2] . 
Mimicking human traits is a common strategy in human-
robot interaction (HRI) based on an assumption that meaningful
interactions depend on what interactors have in common [3]. 
The machine ’s otherness is seen as a limitation, leading to a 
consensus that it should be softened or concealed [3, 4, 5]. Furthermore, human -robot relationships are often modeled after 
human- human relationships [6 , 7], promoting a conception of 
sociality that is “amenable to technological intervention ” [8]. 
We argue that mimic ry limits the potential of robots and the 
relationships we can have with them , and that e mbrac ing and 
creatively leveraging human- machine differences offers new 
opportunities for innovation. This tutorial introduces a non -
anthropocentric approach , harness ing dance knowledge to 
promote more -than-human relationships; participants engage in 
embodied movement explorations and experiential scenario -
making to reimagine how we can relate to machine s (Fig. 1) . 
II.  M
OTIVATION AND BACKGROUND  
A.  Human -Robot  Experience  (HRX)  
A gr
owing community with in HRI emphasizes embodied 
knowledge and alternative modes of meaning -making ; including
Seibt et al.’ s concept of “sociomorphing ” [5], LaViers & 
Maguire ’s emphasis on kinesthetic attunement [ 9], Jochum & 
Derks ’ dance improvisation framework [ 10], and Sirkin & Ju’s 
“embodied design improvisation ” [11 ]. Experience -cente red 
979-8-3503-7893-1/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE
Tutorial
HRI 2025, March 4-6, 2025, Melbourne, Australia
2000

 
    
     
        
    
    
      
     
      
       
   
    
       
     
 
   
   
     
    
        
 
    
      
  
     
     
      
     
   
      
 
   
    
     
    
    
      
     
      
   
     
   desi
gn promotes embodied interaction focusing on empathic 
perspective- taking [12]. Gasteiger et al. [ 13] demonstrate 
benefits of stakeholder involvement in robot design, while 
Šabanović [ 10] highlights a lack of methods for early end -user 
involvement accommodating their imaginations. 
HRX expands experience -centered design approaches by 
acknowledging networks of nonhuman actors and things that our
social relationships are embedded in. It foregrounds dynamics 
and relational possibilities that emerge in the encounter [ 14, 12],
rather than relying on imitation [1 5]. In HRX, h uman- robot 
relationships are dynamic experiences where both human and 
nonhuman participants enact meaning and social agency [4 , 14]. 
The HRX Theatre tutorial expands traditional HRI paradigms to
explore the social potential of nonanthropomorphic robot s 
through embodied, participatory movement -based techniques. 
B. Supporting Sustainable Human- Robot Relationships 
The HRX approach seeks to reimagine human -robot 
relationships, offering practice -based, embodied strategies that 
address key challenges in sustainable HRI research: 
1) Collaboration and Inclusivity: HRX offers a model for 
developing more inclusive approaches by promoting a 
relational ontology that repositions sociality as a shared 
enactment, rather than a predefined attribute. This tutorial is designed to encourage participants to experience and explore 
the following potentials: (a) facilitate early involvement of 
diverse stakeholders through immersive, embodied design 
experiences; (b) probe into how social agency is enacted 
rather than given as an attribute of humanlike appearance ; (c) 
explore a robot ’s unique relational affordances by using 
Relational Body Mapping (RBM) to promot e embodied 
empathy and diverse perspectives. 
2) Socially Responsible Robotics: HRX provides 
opportunities to critically examine and expand notions of social responsibility in robotics by shifting the representational focus toward the performative potential of the encounter [10]. Our approach: (a) counters gendered, humanlike representations 
in robotics by exploring social meaning -making with 
machinelike forms; (b) investigat es alternative modes of 
sociality without mimicking organic forms; (c) enables 
participants to experience and navigate diverse relat ional 
dynamics ; (d) challenges anthropocentric views of social 
responsibility in human -robot interactions. 
III.  T
UTORIAL  OVERVIEW  
We  seek  to  build  a  community  around  key  principles of HRX  
including  the  generative  potential of movement dynamics, 
sociality  as an enactment,  and the  integrative  methodology  of 
kinesthetic attunement  for  more -than-human  approaches  to the  
design  of  human- robot relationships.  Our  tutorial  objectives  are:  
1.  Introduce  HRI researchers and  related  fields to  the  
potential  of  movement  dynamics  for  exploring and 
experiencing how  social  agency might  be enacted in 
human- robot encounters.  
2.  Showcase  immersive  movement -based methods  as  an 
embodied prototyping approach that  can inform  participatory strategies  for  designing social  relationships  
with  machinelike  robots.  
3.  Establish  an  inclusive,  more- than-human playground for  
embracing and creatively engaging with  the  differences  
between humans  and machines.  
4.  Generate  a  deeper,  embodied  understanding  of  more -than-
human relationships  by attending to emergent,  nuanced 
resonances between h  uman a  nd n onhuman e  mbodiments.  
5.  Harness  sensitivity  to  movement  qualities  and  kinesthetic  
attunement  to develop diverse human -robot scenarios .  
To  achieve  the  objectives,  we  will  engage participants in  (a) 
gentle movement  explorations  to  expand  bodily  awareness; (b)  
embodied  encounters  with  machinelike  artifacts  using  RBM;  
and (c)  collaborative development  and  enactment  of  diverse, 
inclusive human- robot scenarios through e  mbodied ro  le-play.  
Our  experience- centered,  movement- driven process  draws  
from  creative  robotics and  dance  knowledge  [4,  14,  16], 
supporting  participants in  playful,  embodied  role-play to explore 
agency,  affect,  trust,  and interdependency with robots  (Fig.  1).  
At  the  heart  of HRX  is the  RBM  methodology,  which  uses 
wearable  costumes  to  stand  in  for  a  robot's  embodiment  and  
choreographic strategies  to prototype relationships  in 
immersive, embodied  ways  [14]. Central to  this  approach  is  
understanding movement  as  a dynamic,  relational, and  
generative force capable of  unfolding relational  dynamics  that  
are core to social  communication [4,  9,  14].  
This  focus  on  movement  dynamics  and  their  generative  
potential  shapes  our  approach to human -robot scenario -making.  
Our  experiential  process  unfolds  through  distinct  phases  of  
transcorporeal attunement: Experience,  Emergence,  Expansion , 
and Embedment . Initially, participants  explore  movement 
possibilities  through attunement.  Rather  than mimicking 
familiar patterns,  they  are  invited  to  attend  to  differences -in-
relation,  focusing  on  what emerges in  the  encounter.  From  
there, they  expand  these  patterns  and rela tionships  by  
examining their  social  meanings  and exploring potential  
connections  to external  goals.  In the final  phase,  we explore 
how  unfolding scenarios  are situated within (imagined)  
environments  and timelines  that  may also be expressed visually 
or  sonically.  This  embodied attunement  process  aims  to support  
the  discovery  of alternative  pathways  for human- robot 
interactions, challenging  traditional approaches  and  
transcending assumed norms.  
Bridging  our  movement  explorations  with  the  scenario  
development,  we will  present  a short  more -than-human 
performance.  The performance aims  to demonstrate RBM's  
potential  for  harnessing kinesthetic knowledge and embodied 
perspective- taking. Extracted  from  our  improvisational  
performance work,  Alloyed  Bodies  [16],  the  performance  
features two  dancers,  two  cube  artifacts,  and  one  cube  robot and  
will  be  open  to  all  conference  attendees.  In  our  research  practice,  
performance -making  serves  as  both  a  mode  of  inquiry  and  an  
embodied prototyping tool  in our  HRX  approach,  revealing 
connections  between human and robot  bodies  we may not  
otherwise imagine [14,  16].  As  part  of  the tutorial,  it  will  serve 
as  a platform  for  choreographic facilitator  and dancer,  Audrey 
Tutorial
HRI 2025, March 4-6, 2025, Melbourne, Australia
2001
   
     
   
   
     
  
         
       
 
        
      
  
   
   
           
   
  
  
     
        
      
 
  
       
       
     
  
     
     
  
    
       
  
      
     
       
      
 
   
     
   
       
      
   
      
  
      
    
    
       
 
 
 
        
          
            Rochette,  to  demonstrate  RBM  principles  and  to  engage  tutorial  
participants  in transcorporeal  meaning -making.   
Fig. 1. Snapshots from participatory audience interactions with cube costumes 
and cube robot (bottom left), with dance artist Felix Palmerson (bottom right). 
Photos: Kris Mah, Sydney, 2022 (top) and Jade Ellis, Brisbane, 2024 (bottom). 
Discussions, reflections, and the use of a novel ‘more -than-
human body- map’ tool will capture participants ’ bodily 
sensations and more -than-human experiences, further deepening 
our exploration of human- robot relationships. By inviting 
participants to explore how we bodily resonate and make 
meaning with machinelike entities, the tutorial seeks to open 
human- robot interaction design to new modes of empathy and 
more -than-human communication. 
A.  Target  A udience  
This 
tutorial is designed for researchers, practitioners, and 
students from HRI, Embodied Cognition, Interaction Design, 
Somaesthetics, and related fields, interested in embodied 
prototyping, nonanthropomorphic robot design, and participatory design strategies for human -robot interaction. 
B.  Maximum  n
 umber  of  participants  
The m
aximum number of participants for this tutorial is 16. 
C.  Tutorial  Sc hedule  
TABLE I. FULL-DAY SCHEDULE FOR THE TUTORIAL 
Session Activity 
Morning 1 
(9:00 –10:30) • Initial body map 
• Introduction to HRX Project & HRX Theater 
• Keynote : Prof. Kate Stevens, Western Sydney 
Univ ersity 
Morning 2 
(11:00–12:3 0) • Movement exploration & kinesthetic awareness 
• Introduction to RBM and cube costumes 
• Transitional body map 
Afternoon 1 
(13:30–15:0 0) • Performance with Audrey Rochette, Kristina Mah, 
and the Cube Performer (robot): Alloyed Bodies 
[MEL -2-2- 1], soundscape by Ad am Nash ; 
• Demonstration & transcorporeal perspective -taking 
• Introduction to scenario development using RBM 
Afternoon 2 
(15:30–17 :00) • Speculative human –robot scenario development 
• Scenario enactments and discussion 
• Reflections, final body map and wrap -up IV.  SPEAKER ’S BIOGRAPHY  
Catherine (Kate) Ste vens is a cognitive psychologist 
investigating psychological processes in creating, perceiving, 
and performing music and dance. A Professor in Psychology 
and Director of Research and Engagement at the MARCS Institute for Brain, Behaviour and Development, Western 
Sydney University , Kate conducts basic and applied research 
into learning, perception, creation, and cognition of complex, nonverbal sequences. Her work illuminates how dancers and 
choreographers externalize cognitive processes through 
movement. Her research projects investigate human -machine 
interaction by applying methods from experimental psychology 
(e.g. design/evaluation of auditory warnings; human -avatar and 
human- robot interaction). Kate has authored over 140 
publications, including an e -book on creativity and cognition in 
contemporary dance. 
R
EFERENCES  
[1]  B.  Obrenovic,  X.  Gu,  G.  Wang,  D.  Godinic,  and  I.  Jakhongirov,  
"Generative AI  and  human– robot  interaction:  implications  and  future  
agenda for  business,  society  and  ethics," AI  &  Society,  2024.  
[2]  L.  Suchman,  Human- Machine  Reconfigurations:  Plans  and  Situated  
Actions.  Cambridge,  UK:  Cambridge  Univ.  Press,  2007.  
[3]  E.  Sandry,  "The  potential  of  otherness  in  robotic  art,"  in  Robots  and  Art:  
Exploring  an  Unlikely  Symbiosis.  Springer,  2016,  pp.  177-189.  
[4]  P.  Gemeinboeck  and  R.  Saunders,  "Moving  beyond  the  mirror:  relational  
and  performative meaning  making  in  human –robot  communication,"  AI 
& Society,  vol.  37,  pp.  549–563,  2022.  
[5]  J.  Seibt,  C.  Vestergaard,  and  M.  F.  Damholdt,  "Sociomorphing,  Not  
Anthropomorphizing:  Towards  a  Typology  of  Experienced  Sociality,"  in  
Culturally  Sustainable  Social  Robotics —Proc.  of  Robophilosophy  2020,  
M.  Nørskov  et  al.,  Eds.  IOS  Press,  2020.  
[6]  S.  Nyholm  et  al.,  "Social  Robots  and  Society,"  in  Ethics  of  Socially  
Disruptive  Technologies:  An  Introduction,  I.  van  de  Poel  et  al.,  Eds.  2023,  
pp.  53-82.  
[7]  M.  Alač,  "Social  robots:  Things  or  agents?,"  AI  &  Society,  vol.  31,  no.  4,  
pp.  519-535,  2016.  
[8]  S.  Šabanović,  "Robots  in  society,  society  in  robots,"  Int.  J.  Social  
Robotics,  vol.  2,  no.  4,  pp.  439-450,  2010.  
[9]  A.  LaViers  and  C.  Maguire,  Making  Meaning  with  Machines:  Somatic  
Strategies,  Choreographic  Technologies,  and  Notational  Abstractions  
through a Laban/Bartenieff Lens. MIT Press, 2023.  
[10]  E.  Jochum  and  J.  Derks,  "Tonight  we  improvise!  Real-time  tracking  for  
human- robot  improvisational  dance,"  in  Proc.  6th  Int.  Conf.  Movement  
and  Computing,  2019,  pp.  1-8.  
[11]  D.  Sirkin  and  W.  Ju,  "Using  Embodied  Design  Improvisation  as  a  Design  
Research  Tool,"  in  Proc.  Int.  Conf.  Human  Behavior  in  Design,  Ascona,  
Switzerland,  2014.  
[12]  P.  Wright  and  J.  McCarthy,  "Experience -centered  design:  designers,  
users,  and communities  in dialogue,"  Synthesis  Lectures  on Human -
Centered  Informatics,  vol.  3,  no.  1,  pp.  1-123,  2010.  
[13]  N.  Gasteiger,  M.  Hellou,  and  H.  S.  Ahn,  "Toward  Socially  Assistive  
Robots  for  the  Elderly:  A  User -Centered  Design  Approach  Involving  
Older  Adults  and  Health  Care  Professionals,"  Int.  J.  Social  Robotics,  vol.  
13,  no.  8,  pp.  1895 -1910,  2021.  
[14]  P.  Gemeinboeck  and  R.  Saunders,  "Dancing  with  the  Nonhuman:  A  
Feminist,  Embodied,  Material  Inquiry  into  the  Making  of  Human -Robot  
Relationships,"  in  Proc.  2023  ACM/IEEE  Int.  Conf.  Human -Robot  
Interaction  (HRI '23),  New  York,  NY,  USA,  2023,  pp.  51–59.  
[15]  S.  Turkle,  Alone  together:  Why  we  expect  more  from  technology  and  less  
from  each  other.  Hachette U  K,  2017.  
[16]  P.  Gemeinboeck  and  R.  Saunders,  "Alloyed  Bodies:  Performance -Making  
as Embodied  Prototyping  of  Human -Robot  Relationships,"  in  Proc.  16th  
Int.  Conf.  Social  Robotics +  AI,  Odense,  Denmark,  2024.  
Tutorial
HRI 2025, March 4-6, 2025, Melbourne, Australia
2002
