Research in Dance Education
ISSN: 1464-7893 (Print) 1470-1111 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/crid20
A bi-ethnographic study of the use of ChatGPT
in dance teaching in Chinese and Thai higher
education
Xu Ma, Tuomeiciren Heyang, Yuzhong Yao & Yu Xiao Ren
To cite this article: Xu Ma, Tuomeiciren Heyang, Yuzhong Yao & Yu Xiao Ren (03 Apr 2025):
A bi-ethnographic study of the use of ChatGPT in dance teaching in Chinese and Thai higher
education, Research in Dance Education, DOI: 10.1080/14647893.2025.2483725
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/14647893.2025.2483725
Published online: 03 Apr 2025.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 110
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=crid20
A bi-ethnographic study of the use of ChatGPT in dance 
teaching in Chinese and Thai higher education
Xu Maa, Tuomeiciren Heyang
b, Yuzhong Yaoc and Yu Xiao Rend
aSchool of Music and Dance, College of Chinese & ASEAN Arts, Chengdu University, Chengdu, China; bThe 
Arts International College of Krirk University, Bangkok, Thailand; cSchool of Computer Science of Lampang 
Inter-techl College, Lampang, Thailand; dThe Graduate School of Adamson University, Manila, Philippines
ABSTRACT
In the context of the increasing integration of generative artificial 
intelligence (AI) tools, such as ChatGPT, into higher dance educa -
tion, this study examines the interaction patterns between dance 
educators and ChatGPT in educational institutions in China and 
Thailand, and their impact on the teaching and learning processes. 
As four dance educators in higher education, we reflect on the 
potential applications of AI in dance education, based on our own 
teaching practices. Particularly its role in constructing virtual teach -
ing spaces and facilitating post-human educational interactions. 
Utilizing a bi-ethnographic approach, we collected and analyzed 
qualitative data on the interactions between dance educators and 
ChatGPT through field investigations. Combining bi-ethnographic 
dialogues, we explored in depth the application scenarios and 
impacts of ChatGPT in higher education settings. The findings 
indicate that, despite ongoing debates about the use of generative 
AI in higher education, it offers positive support for teaching and 
learning, especially in terms of interactions between human and 
non-human elements. This research reveals the innovative applica -
tions of generative AI in dance education; emphasizes the impor -
tance of exploring human-machine interactions in higher 
education; and provides new theoretical perspectives and practical 
pathways for the digital transformation of dance education.ARTICLE HISTORY 
Received 4 November 2024  
Accepted 20 March 2025 
KEYWORDS 
AI; dance education; dual 
ethnography; higher 
education; ChatGPT
Introduction
Since OpenAI released a chatbot programme, ChatGPT, on 30 November 2022, the 
working mode of all walks of life in the world has been undergoing tremendous changes, 
and generative artificial intelligence like ChatGPT has completely changed the working 
mode of many industries (Y. Liu and Lin 2023 ). As four academics working at the 
intersection of dance and higher education, we have been pondering about the impact 
of generative AI like ChatGPT on dance education, and how this impact may persist. We 
pay particular attention to the adjustments being made in the higher education environ -
ment and the different ways dance is taught and learned in the context of generative AI 
entering all walks of life. In this paper, we relate our experience of using ChatGPT as 
CONTACT Tuomeiciren Heyang 
 376452202@qq.com 
 The Arts International College of Krirk University, Bangkok, 
ThailandRESEARCH IN DANCE EDUCATION                     
https://doi.org/10.1080/14647893.2025.2483725
© 2025 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group 
a medium of instruction in the teaching of dance courses in higher education, including 
the opportunities, challenges and limitations that may arise in the wider practice of 
higher education.
Due to the release of generative artificial intelligence, such as ChatGPT, ChatGPT is 
entering higher education at an alarming rate (Y. Zhang, You, and Wang 2024 ), and all 
walks of life. The traditional teaching mode of higher education has also been compre -
hensively impacted (Dempere et al. 2023 ). During the period between 2023 and 2024, 
there has been a significant surge in research examining the impact of generative artificial 
intelligence, such as ChatGPT, on higher education (Adeshola and Adepoju 2023 ; Jiang  
2023 ; Zeb, Ullah, and Karim 2024 ). Early studies primarily focused on the challenges 
encountered during the initial integration of generative AI into higher education, as well 
as the discomfort experienced by students during its adoption (S. Wang 2023a ). 
Concurrently, research has explored the application of AI in choreography and dance 
performance (K. Wang and Jiang 2023 ; Zeng 2024 ), delving into the potential difficulties 
of incorporating AI into dance education, that the body serves as the central teaching 
tool, both in the classroom and online settings. These studies have provided preliminary 
theoretical and practical support for the integration of AI and dance education (K. Wang  
2024 ). However, our current understanding of how generative AI, like ChatGPT, might 
change teaching and learning in higher education in the long term is still limited (Shen  
2023 ).
The bi-ethnographic approach used in this study also means that our identity and our 
cultural context are of great significance. These factors also support the methodological 
basis of this study and the formation of views.
Our four scholars met at a dance education seminar in August 2023. In the exchange, 
we found a common interest in internationalization, cross-cultural communication, and 
teaching design of dance education in higher education. Because of this common interest, 
we, four dance teachers in universities, have become friendly partners. This kind of equal, 
open and pleasant exchange is conducive to sincere communication and exchange 
among scholars (S. Liu et al. 2006 ). In a free exchange for this dance education seminar 
in August 2023, Ma Xu shared a video where she and her students were trying to use 
ChatGPT in class with He Yang Tuomei Tsiren. She said that her students found it very 
challenging and innovative to use ChatGPT to teach and learn dance lessons. This 
sparked a discussion among the four of us, and we felt the need to collaborate on an 
article that would delve deeper into the teaching and learning experience of using 
ChatGPT.
Along with the generative artificial intelligence of ChatGPT class, the rapid advance -
ment of intelligent education in higher education is promoted. The existing literature 
reflects that many educators are not necessarily proficient in intelligent education and 
still often adopt traditional teaching practices. They simply apply such traditional teach -
ing practices to intelligent education formats to varying degrees (Chen 2023 ). However, 
CHATGPt-like generative AI has found its way into teaching multiple disciplines in 
higher education and has also facilitated discussions on instructional design, student 
well-being, ethics, and more. It provides a good foundation for future higher education to 
create teaching and learning experiences that are likely to resonate well with teachers and 
learners (Z. Gao and Wang 2023 ; T. Wang, Song, and Jin 2024 ). However, among the 
numerous intelligent education available for teaching and learning, more attention needs 2
 X. MA ET AL.
to be given to the teaching and learning of dance disciplines (Shi 2020 ). As four teachers 
from dance disciplines engaged in higher education, we became curious about ChatGPT 
and its role in our classrooms. Our background in dance first sparked our interest in 
ChatGPT. ChatGPT enables the rapid generation of dance ideas, and ChatGPT allows 
many people who might not otherwise participate in dance creation to participate in it for 
the first time. With this curiosity and subsequent exploration in mind, we decided to 
collaborate on this article, focusing on our teaching experience with ChatGPT in dance 
education in higher education and the question that inspired our thinking: How do we 
experience ChatGPT as a teaching tool?
ChatGPT is a new chatbot model developed by OpenAI, an American artificial 
intelligence research laboratory. Its biggest feature is that it can conduct dialogues by 
learning and understanding human language and constantly update its own database 
through its powerful algorithm ability to realize intelligent software that mimics human 
language organization. It can also engage in supernormal reasoning interactions based on 
questions posed by chat partners (T. Wu et al. 2023 ). At present, ChatGPT can not only 
carry out conversations but also complete writing, picture production, video production, 
etc., covering many areas of human work, study and life (Kalla et al. 2023 ). Within two 
months of ChatGPT’s launch, monthly active users exceeded 100 million (Y. Liu 2023 ). 
Although ChatGPT is a relatively new large model of generative AI, it has rapidly risen 
around the world since its release in November 2022, especially in the past year or so; 
people have recognized that ChatGPT is being popularized and used in various fields 
around the world (Y. Zhang, You, and Wang 2024 ).
When searching the literature, it can be noted that ChatGPT is relatively little explored 
in the field of instructional design. Kostikova et al. (2024 ) studied the use of ChatGPT for 
professional English curriculum development. Chang et al. (2024 ) also focused on 
ChatGPT, which they used to design the teaching of nursing courses to promote student 
learning. S. Wang (2023a ) used ChatGPT in her teaching of mental health for college 
students and found the application value and potential risks. ChatGPT has been used and 
explored in many areas outside of educational settings, from enriching legal supervision 
and building a new generation of integrated legal platforms to drawing advertisements 
(Rodriguez-Sarmiento, Galpin, and Sanchez-Riaño 2024 ), facilitating marketing com -
munications and optimizing search engines (Knuuttila 2024 ). Therefore, there is still 
much room for research exploring ChatGPT’s potential to provide learning.
In this paper, we take a dual ethnographic approach to exploring our interactions with 
ChatGPT in teaching and consider this methodology as a form of ‘reflection in action’ in 
the light of Schon (2017). The ‘prevalence’ of ChatGPT around the world, its unknown 
impact may have on higher education, and the uncertainty of its future development 
remind us that we can only provide limited insights into ChatGPT’s early entry into 
higher education. Although ChatGPT will be widely and deeply applied in the field of 
higher education in the future, relevant research results will be more and more abundant, 
and the depth of research can also touch the teaching design of every subject and course 
in higher education. However, in the early days of ChatGPT’s entry into higher educa -
tion, it is still vital that we express and share these experiences as a way to examine the 
process and reveal the teaching and learning that ChatGPT offers. We believe that despite 
its cross-cultural context and specific time orientation, this study has the potential to 
make a small contribution to the development of the body of knowledge for ChatGPT to RESEARCH IN DANCE EDUCATION
 3
enter the field of higher education to carry out teaching and the future exploration of 
other practitioners in the field of education. The following sections provide an overview 
of the methodology employed in this research, including the theoretical framework and 
cultural context in which we are positioned.
The position of dual ethnographic methodology and multicultural 
orientation
The research method of dual ethnography is adopted in this paper. Biethnography, as 
a form of qualitative research, is a collaborative research methodology in which multiple 
researchers collaborate to engage in a dialogue about the different phenomena presented 
within a phenomenon, with each researcher’s voice explicitly expressed. They work 
collaboratively to understand and interpret the significance of this phenomenon 
(Burleigh and Burm 2022 ). In the study of dual ethnography, researchers aim to engage 
in written dialogue through a play-like format, questioning and reconstructing existing 
ideas. The research method of dual ethnography is a critical dialogue between authors, 
transcending regional and cultural differences, exchanging their own subjectivity and 
experience with each other, and closely combining theoretical frameworks to complete 
the interpretation of specific phenomena (Lowe, Kiczkowiak, and Lu 2016 ). Through 
existing studies, we have found that in bi-ethnographic communication, explanations for 
specific phenomena are usually produced through the dialogue jointly constructed by 
researchers and through the continuous interweaving process (Runa and Martin 2021 ).
We shared online documents over four months from March to July 2024 and devel -
oped the body of our critical dialogue. During these four months, the four researchers 
wrote at least once a week in a document to share our teaching experience. During this 
time, if we find more teaching experiences or ideas, we will also write more. From the 
very beginning of our writing, each of us simply wrote in accordance with his own style of 
consciousness. After about two weeks, the four of us started asking each other questions. 
Of course, given that we are having some conversations at the beginning of our teaching 
experience, we have not assigned a particular focus, but rather more understanding and 
inclusiveness allow our conversations to expand in many directions. We also shared 
videos of ChatGPT classes with each other on WeChat to explore more potential that 
ChatGPT could bring to course teaching. Our exploration of using ChatGPT to teach 
courses included watching videos of each other’s teaching experiences, following stu-
dents’ comments, and being honest and open about documenting your own teaching 
experiences. At the same time, when the four of us had a long conversation in our online 
document, we began to use ‘Reflection in action’ analysis, and to distil the key themes 
that emerged around the focused questions. Immediately afterwards, we edited our 
conversations around the key emerging themes that emerged. Last month, we reviewed 
the paper. Using shared documents, it took us about four weeks to expand these 
conversations into more textual material. Our purpose in expanding the additional 
textual material is to expand the specific ideas related to our own teaching experience, 
the learning experience of our students, and the cultural context in which we are located, 
and we have edited this expanded bi-ethnographic material into the dialogue text.
In the analysis process of this paper, we adopted narrative text and theory in parallel 
(Graesser, Singer, and Trabasso 1994 ). Refining narrative text, we present the key points 4
 X. MA ET AL.
we need to discuss and form these meanings. As scholars such as Graesser, Singer, and 
Trabasso (1994 ) explain, ‘the parallel of narrative text and theory does not follow 
a particular approach. It relies on borrowing and reconfiguring concepts, creating 
methods, and creating new combinations, based on intellectual inferences, reference to 
cultural contexts, to produce theories.’ We also observe that advocate starting from an 
open and inclusive perspective, then narrowing the focus to specific themes and ideas, 
further refining the method and applying it extensively to case studies. This approach 
resonates with our own teaching methodology.
In the application of theory, we combine critical theory with a posthuman perspective. 
We accomplish this by drawing on the critical theory of intelligent education to support 
body movement in dance education while using posthumanist theory to guide our 
dialogue. This includes a critique of the inherent conservatism of humanism through 
the lens of posthumanism (Herbrechter et al. 2020 ).
Multicultural orientation is very important for us to focus on our experience con-
ducting ethnography research (Stahl and Maznevski 2021 ). We are also aware of our 
cultural position in China and Thailand, the cultural differences brought by these two 
countries, and the differences in the education system (including dance education). At 
the same time, it is particularly noteworthy in this study that China and Thailand have 
different positions in formulating education policies and teaching practices due to their 
different cultural backgrounds (J. Gao 2021 ). In China, the development of education is 
strategically aligned with pragmatic objectives to support national construction efforts. 
A significant milestone in this direction was marked by the release of the Action Plan on 
AI Innovation in Universities in 2018, which has since catalyzed a substantial increase in 
the integration of AI technology within the education sector (T. Wang and Ren 2018 ). 
After the Chinese Ministry of Education launched the AI Empowered Education Action 
in 2024, the close integration of AI technology and teaching and learning in educational 
institutions was promoted (Su 2024 ). In Thailand, education focus on adaptive learning, 
a learner-centred approach that presents free, inclusive teaching characteristics, 
Thailand’s education policy focuses on encouragement, ethics, privacy and data protec -
tion when using educational technology (Muangmee et al. 2021 ). Although our dual 
ethnographic work does not deliberately seek to compare educational policies and 
teaching methods between China and Thailand, their unique cultural backgrounds 
inevitably influence and shape our teaching experience (Wei et al. 2022 ). In the dialogue 
shared below, we present the unique identities and cultural positioning of Chinese and 
Thai teachers. At the same time, it is necessary to acknowledge that we are four dance 
educators and researchers, and we aim to share, reflect, analyze, and question the use of 
ChatGPT in dance teaching and learning environments.
In conclusion, the four researchers employed a bi-ethnographic approach to engage in 
authentic and egalitarian dialogues, documenting our genuine teaching experiences and 
the questions raised by students. While it is acknowledged that completely eradicating 
personal biases is unattainable, significant efforts were made to uphold a neutral per-
spective throughout the dialogue and data collection phases. This approach was critical to 
preserving the validity, reliability, and overall credibility of the research findings. This 
approach allowed us to reflect on the potential applications of generative artificial 
intelligence in dance education, particularly its role in constructing virtual teaching 
spaces and facilitating post-human educational interactions, based on our own teaching RESEARCH IN DANCE EDUCATION
 5
practices. We base this article on our own experience, so we do not need ethical 
permission to collect shared data. At the same time, we pay great attention to the ethical 
issues in our dialogues, and we strictly follow the requirements of the ‘Academic Ethics 
Manual of the Chengdu University of China’ to avoid mentioning the names or identifi -
able details of individuals other than our four authors.
Dialogue
The following conversations have been carefully constructed through our shared teach -
ing experiences, ideas, narratives, and findings and have been edited. Although we would 
like to share more teaching experiences and stories from teaching, due to the word limit 
in this article, we had to set aside many of the stories we shared together and tried to 
preserve the most important points of our discussion in the dialogue below. We invite 
readers to join us as a third party in the conversation to hear our thoughts on teaching 
with ChatGPT, our small victories in teaching, and our frustrations with teaching using 
ChatGPT.
Ma Xu: Teaching dance courses in our university attaches great importance to practic -
ability and actively follows the master-apprentice mode according to the traditional 
dance teaching mode. Therefore, cultivating students’ technical skills has become the 
mainstream of dance course design and teaching implementation. Ren Yuxiao (one of 
our four authors) and I teach ‘dance creativity’ to students at the university. In teaching 
this course, we are actively looking for ways to change to a more active dance teaching 
method that is more student-centred and can promote teacher-student interaction. 
Perhaps this is not ‘new’ outside of China, but it should be noted that the traditional 
‘master-apprentice model’ of dance teaching in China is still dominant, so the teaching of 
skills is the focus. In January of 2023, my colleagues told me about an artificial intelli -
gence called ‘ChatGPT’ that can communicate with people, create dance scripts, and 
generate pictures based on text instructions proposed by people. So, I discussed with 
Yuxiao Ren (one of our four authors) that we could try to use ChatGPT to give students 
innovative, exploratory, interactive teaching during the March to June 2023 ‘dance 
creativity’ course. We believe that, in the early days of the release of generative artificial 
intelligence, using ChatGPT for dance teaching in Chinese universities represents 
a relatively rare exploration within the context of Chinese higher education, which 
traditionally emphasizes the ‘mentor-apprentice model.’ We discovered that many stu-
dents in our class were exploring the use of ChatGPT on their own and sent us a message 
on WeChat asking if we could teach them to use ChatGPT to create their own dance ideas 
as part of our ‘dance creativity’ course. I asked my students on WeChat, ‘Why would you 
want to learn to use ChatGPT?’ The answer given by the students was that learning to use 
ChatGPT would give us more creativity and speed up our creation when creating dances. 
Some students also said that learning to use ChatGPT gave them more interdisciplinary 
and cross-cultural creativity and collaboration, and they could create and practice dance 
with students from other disciplines.6
 X. MA ET AL.
Ren Yuxiao: I also saw that the students of the ‘Dance Creativity’ course sent me 
messages on WeChat, which also contained different ideas. Students wrote in their 
WeChat messages to me that learning to use ChatGPT would make it easier for them 
to find jobs because the current job market requires interdisciplinary skills. So, Ma Xu 
(one of our four authors) and I used ChatGPT to give students an interactive teaching 
session in May 2023 in a ‘Dance Creativity’ class to test the learning experience of 
ChatGPT. We taught the students how to formulate in the text for ChatGPT, and 30 
students sent a prompt in their ChatGPT dialogue box: ChatGPT, can you write a 500- 
word Chinese creative dance text for me? My dance creative theme is ‘Gulin Lantern’, 
a traditional folk dance from Sichuan Province, China. In an instant, 30 students received 
a reply from ChatGPT on their own ChatGPT page, and because of the efficient opera -
tion of the large AI model, ChatGPT gave each of the 30 students a different character of 
the idea. When the students used it, many of them screamed loudly and excitedly. One of 
them cried excitedly, saying, ‘This is amazing. In 10 seconds, I completed an idea that 
I could not think of for six months before.’
He Yang: Yes, I fully understand what Ma Xu and Ren Yuxiao (two of our four authors) 
are saying about the excitement of students, and I congratulate you on the positive 
experience you have brought to students and the success you have achieved in teaching. 
I also understand the ‘master-apprentice model’ you are talking about, because I was 
once a Chinese folk dancer, and I once won the highest award of Chinese folk dance, the 
‘Lotus Award’. In January 2023, I was hired by Thailand’s Kela University as a professor 
to teach students the ‘Dance creativity’ course. At that time, I was following the tradi -
tional mode of dance teaching and did not consider the use of ChatGPT in my course 
teaching. Moreover, I believed that the way I taught ‘Dance creativity’ was to focus on 
human creativity, and that dance creativity must be completed by people themselves and 
carried out from beginning to end. It now seems that I was too ‘traditional humanist’ at 
the time, and I ignored the fact that times change, things change, and so do our teaching 
methods. For me, I joined teaching with ChatGPT at a later stage. I have heard about the 
power of ChatGPT, and I first encountered it when Ma Xu (one of our four authors) 
shared a video of your class with us at our dance education seminar in August 2023. 
Later, inspired by your teaching experience using ChatGPT for a ‘Dance creativity’ 
course, I started looking for a way to incorporate ChatGPT into the practice of 
a ‘Dance creativity’ course I taught with Yao Yuzhong (one of our four authors) in 
Thailand. In January 2024, we tried it just once in our ‘Dance creativity’ class. Thai 
university students are looking forward to it, and we constantly have students asking us 
before class: ‘Teacher, do I need to prepare anything in advance? Do I need to download 
any software? Can I get an unexpected dance idea in less than a minute?’ I know that 
students are full of expectations and want to actively explore new things. This is also 
closely related to Thailand’s education, which encourages students to explore and is fully 
inclusive of students’ exploration and innovation. So, Yao Yuzhong and I decided that 
this would be our opportunity to incorporate ChatGPT into our ‘Dance creativity’ course 
practice. In the past, I would ask my students to give a TED talk on the social current 
affairs topic of dance and justice. TED Talks are challenging for dance students, who have 
less than 18 minutes (accompanied by PowerPoint slides and video materials) to present RESEARCH IN DANCE EDUCATION
 7
their own ideas on complex social and current affairs topics, including dance and justice. 
However, this time, Yao Yuzhong and I decided to change the form of class from TED to 
students’ on-site learning using ChatGPT and give speeches according to the results of 
on-site use. We thought perhaps such a practice might make this task more challenging.
Yao Yuzhong: Yes, as He Yang (one of our four authors) said, at the beginning of the 
Dance Creativity course, I saw that some of the students in our class were a little confused 
about what we were proposing. Some students were excited to use ChatGPT right away, 
while others said they had never touched it before. My sense is that they may be 
somewhat skeptical about using such a generative AI with novel elements in dance 
classes in higher education. Of course, this beginning also made He Yang (one of our 
four authors) feel a little frustrated and did not give us confidence. However, we actively 
encouraged the students by first teaching them to log on to ChatGPT, then asking 
ChatGPT questions, and then teaching them to generate images based on the creative 
text provided by ChatGPT. After the session, when the students got the creative text and 
pictures provided by ChatGPT, many of them were excited and applauded, just like your 
students in China, including the students who were confused at first. He Yang and I were 
very happy at that time and felt the confidence that the students gave us. Ma Xu (one of 
our four authors): Do you think students in China use ChatGPT a lot in their daily 
studies?
Ma Xu: Yes, I have seen our students often use ChatGPT in their studies after we taught 
them to use ChatGPT, as well as in creative academic paper writing and conversations 
about life and entertainment. At the same time, I understand the challenges that you and 
He Yang face in classroom teaching in Thailand, and I think it may be related to whether 
the students have learned how to use ChatGPT in dance learning in higher education 
properly. For me, it was the enthusiasm with which students learned by using ChatGPT 
that motivated me to continue using it in my teaching. My college also set up the ‘AIGC 
Dance Creative Teaching Lab’ in April 2024, which greatly encourages my future teach -
ing plans. During ‘Dance Creativity’ this semester, Ren Yuxiao (one of our four authors) 
also instructed our students to make a one-minute dance video and posted it on China’s 
Douyin platform, where it got a lot of ‘likes’.
Ren Yuxiao: Yes, I guided our students to make a one-minute short dance video in the 
Dance Creativity course that I taught with Ma Xu (one of our four authors). I instructed 
the students to first ask ChatGPT questions about creating dance ideas for ‘Ke mu san’ 
and then continue to give ChatGPT instructions on how to generate pictures based on 
the creative text provided by ChatGPT. After getting the pictures generated by ChatGPT, 
I instructed the students to use the function of ‘Photo generation video’ in the ‘Clip’ 
software to synthesize the pictures generated by ChatGPT into a short video and then set 
the background music of ‘Ke mu san’. In this way, in a very short time, the students made 
a creative dance video by themselves. They selected one of the short dance videos they 
made and shared it on the Chinese platform TikTok, where members of the public 8
 X. MA ET AL.
watched the dance video, interacted with the students, sent messages to the students, and 
participated in the students’ online communities. This short video made our students 
famous in a way that Ma Xu and I had never planned, and it made us feel a little ‘victory’ 
in using ChatGPT for dance teaching. I honestly want our students to become ‘popular.’. 
I mean, who doesn’t get a thrill when a dance video posted by one of their students gets 
a ‘like’? It can be seen that in my university, this kind of fast and efficient teaching of 
dance creativity is very valuable for teaching a subject like dance. However, it is hard 
work to keep our ability updated and developed in the same way as ChatGPT. After all, 
Ma Xu and I have not had formal training on how to use ChatGPT in higher education 
dance teaching. We are just constantly exploring our own skills.
He Yang: Yes, Yuzhong Yao and I (one of our four authors) are also using our own 
explorations of ChatGPT to guide our teaching. I thought students might like this 
innovative form of teaching, but when I talked to my colleagues, I got an unexpectedly 
different voice. Some of my colleagues felt that this was not really a ‘serious’ teaching 
activity and immediately raised concerns about the ‘destruction of traditional culture’, 
which is a very serious issue in Thailand’s traditional culture preservation institutions. 
This made me a little nervous. Some students said to me, ‘ChatGPT is so powerful and so 
creative. Why do we need to dance? We can change careers.’ In my opinion, as ChatGPT 
begins to enter higher education, it is essential for teachers and students to use it 
accurately in teaching. This includes exploring how it can contribute to the development 
of the dance profession, identifying ways to avoid harming traditional culture, and 
addressing the ethical considerations surrounding the use of ChatGPT in higher educa -
tion. There are still many problems that we need to continue to practice and do more 
critical research.
Ma Xu: Yes, I also think that there will be a lot of problems and ethics worthy of practice 
and critical research at the beginning of ChatGPT’s entry into higher education. I also 
believe that there are many people who are ‘confused’ or ‘hard to understand.’ In 
May 2024, three months after the four of us started writing and sharing our teaching 
experiences weekly, Yuxiao Ren and I (one of our four authors) were teaching a course on 
‘Dance Creativity’ when several students told us in class: ‘ChatGPT generated dance ideas 
and videos so quickly, it seems we will have to lie flat in the future.’ ‘Lying flat’ is not 
a positive phenomenon; ‘Lying flat’ is a current Internet buzzword in China, meaning 
that no matter what the other person does, you will not have any reaction or resistance, 
and your heart will not stir. In the face of the deep adjustment of industrial structure 
brought about by the emergence of generative artificial intelligence, such as ChatGPT, 
the development space of traditional industries is limited, and the competition for jobs in 
the dance industry is becoming more and more fierce, which ultimately reflects the work 
and life at the personal level, forming the phenomenon of ‘Nei juan’. Therefore, the 
students’ ‘lying down’ also expresses the students’ concern about the employment 
pressure caused by the emergence of ChatGPT for dancers who only know traditional 
skills.RESEARCH IN DANCE EDUCATION
 9
Yao Yuzhong: But Ma Xu, do you think the use of ChatGPT in teaching is just a stage, 
just a means to ‘Xi jing’ of students? Can ChatGPT limit our creativity as human beings 
or make us dependent on it?
Ma Xu: ChatGPT was obviously not developed for teaching purposes. So, we as educa -
tors need to remember that it is designed for other purposes, not that we must rely on it. 
In China, ChatGPT and other generative AI dance teaching are very popular; many 
university teachers, government officials, and entrepreneurs in the private sector use 
ChatGPT and other generative AI. After China’s ‘Two Sessions’ in March 2024, the 
governor of Sichuan Province, where I live, also went to the University of Electronic 
Science and Technology of China, which is attached to us, to attend the founding 
conference of the ‘Artificial Intelligence Institute’. We have seen recent news reports 
that some excellent comprehensive universities in China, such as Sichuan University, are 
gradually withdrawing traditional teaching majors such as dance performance, vocal 
music performance, and broadcasting and hosting. Therefore, I think the use of ChatGPT 
in teaching is not a short stage, not a ‘bait’ for students to ‘Xi jing’, but to promote the 
development of teaching, provide students with a variety of learning modes, and promote 
the opportunity for students to improve their learning ability. At the same time, in 
general, I see that in my ‘Dance Creativity’ course with Ren Yuxiao (one of our four 
authors), the students really enjoy the creative dance learning experience that ChatGPT 
brings. But, having said that, Yang He (one of our four authors), do you think it also has 
something to do with the cultural context of where we each work? How is the use of 
ChatGPT in education viewed and developed in China or Thailand more broadly?
He Yang: Of course, over the last 10 years, I have taught dance courses in many different 
cultural institutions of higher education, universities in China, universities in New 
Zealand, universities in the United States, universities in the United Kingdom, and 
universities in Thailand, where I am working now. I noticed that each place had 
a different understanding and approach to the use of technology in education, including 
the use of AI or, more specifically, which AI technologies to use. But to be clear, some of 
my experiences predate ChatGPT. Given that ChatGPT is now almost two years old and 
entering this period in higher education, where efforts are being made to adapt education 
to The Times, things have changed dramatically everywhere. In May 2024, Thailand’s 
Ministry of Higher Education, Science, Research and Innovation launched the ‘MHESI 
for AI’ policy and proposed to incorporate AI into university curricula to ensure that 
students and university staff understand AI and can use it effectively. I think until 
December 2022; it would be almost impossible to imagine teaching dance classes in 
a university setting via AI, like ChatGPT, which was not even considered. In the past, 
I used social media platforms like Douyin to teach dance classes and gained 200,000 fans. 
It can be seen that our teaching experience has been improving with the development of 
The Times. However, I have noticed that some students have raised concerns about 
increasing the difficulty of their employment because of the powerful function of 10
 X. MA ET AL.
ChatGPT, and some teachers have raised concerns about affecting the protection of 
traditional culture because of the automatic generation of dance ideas by ChatGPT, 
which I fully understand. I also recognize the complexity surrounding ChatGPT’s entry 
into higher education, which we have yet to fully understand, dissect, and establish, 
especially regarding ethics, intellectual property, and privacy concerns. I believe that 
before these issues are fully ‘resolved,’ we should continue to use ChatGPT seriously in 
curriculum teaching while actively exploring and critically studying its potential. We may 
not yet have fully experienced all the value ChatGPT can bring to the development of 
teaching.
The discussion that emerges from the aforementioned bi-ethnographic 
dialogue
From the above double ethnographic dialogue between our four authors, we began to 
reflect on what the teaching experiences we shared in our conversations with each other 
might reveal. By applying the thought process of narrative text and theory in parallel 
(Graesser, Singer, and Trabasso 1994 ), we explored in depth the concepts that resonate in 
our bi-ethnographic dialogues. We discussed in depth the following questions: What 
encounters does the use of ChatGPT in education bring us with posthuman education? 
What meaningful space and ethical issues might the changing educational agendas in 
China and Thailand raise for the use of ChatGPT in higher education? How will higher 
education benefit from the engagement of generative AI, such as ChatGPT, for higher 
education and wider learning? Conversations around these issues have gradually shaped 
and focused our discussions.
The starting point for integrating ChatGPT into our curriculum and exploring it in 
different ways is the work of the ‘posthumanist theorist’, as well as a number of educa -
tional scholars who have been exploring posthumanist perspectives on intelligent educa -
tion (Biswas Mellamphy 2021 ; Dube et al. 2023 ; Nath and Manna 2023 ). We will discuss 
three areas of interest. First discussion: We use ChatGPT in teaching to explore an 
encounter with posthuman education. Second discussion: We dissect how generative AI, 
like ChatGPT, can create meaningful spaces for teaching and learning in higher educa -
tion settings. Third discussion: As we move into reflections on discipline-specific con-
tributions to dance, what can generative AI like ChatGPT offer for body expression in the 
teaching of dance in higher education? In these discussions, we argue that dance as 
a learning form of physical expression and generative AI like ChatGPT can be a platform 
and medium to explore new teaching and learning methods. At the same time, we also 
highlight what the discipline of dance may ‘lose’ when teaching dance through digital 
technology.
From the beginning of this discussion, all four of us acknowledged that our attempts to 
bring generative AI like ChatGPT into higher education and to integrate ChatGPT into 
our curriculum were not moves that everyone might be comfortable with or interested in. 
However, we must also acknowledge that ChatGPT’s release in November 2022 ushered 
in an era of AI and higher education peers (Xu and Duan 2024 ), and the possibilities and 
opportunities contained in the teaching experience we explored and shared were 
beneficial.RESEARCH IN DANCE EDUCATION
 11
Exploring ChatGPT’s encounter with post human education
Our four teachers brought ChatGPT into our teaching and learning activities, which also 
caused some teachers and students to have human-computer symbiosis anxiety. This 
kind of human-machine symbiosis anxiety is actually not uncommon, and there have 
been different ‘human-machine symbiosis anxiety’ in the past two decades (Hudlicka  
2003 ). It is only with the advent of generative artificial intelligence such as ChatGPT and 
its powerful functions that we can more closely observe that humans and artificial 
intelligence have become intimate and have perfect encounters in multiple fields. As 
explained by many scholars, the convenience brought by artificial intelligence to life 
(Cheng et al. 2023 ), and the creativity brought to work have quietly entered our lives and 
work (Zhao and Xing 2024 ; Zheng, Fan, and Jia 2024 ). In this encounter, we also see that 
post humanist thought provides a research perspective for these phenomena.
In reflecting on the experience of our four teachers using ChatGPT in their teaching, 
we may have moved away from the pure, traditional, master-apprentice model of 
teaching dance skills and were constantly looking for ways to extend dance teaching 
into the posthuman space. Posthumanist philosopher Rosi Braidotti (2016 ) articulates 
the idea that ‘disagreeing’ in a given mindset is essential to an ethics and inquiry that 
demands respect for the complexity of the real world in which we live. In such a view, 
ethical considerations include the exploration and understanding of non-human actors 
(including animals, sound, light, plants, objects, technology, etc.) (Xie and Wang 2024 ). 
Through our experience of teaching with ChatGPT, if we look at it from the perspective 
of, we may need to consider abandoning the previous traditional teaching model with 
humanism as the core, removing the centralization of the humanistic perspective and 
rethinking the teaching methods adapted to the contemporary era. We need to see 
ChatGPT as a beautiful encounter with teaching and learning.
Of course, the four of us teachers have also discovered through our discussions that by 
integrating ChatGPT into our teaching and learning activities, we can actively explore the 
expansion of dance teaching into the posthuman space. This includes the exploration, 
formation, development, and sharing of this teaching method, as well as examining the 
relationship between humans and both human and non-human elements. Many assump -
tions may be made about the future of teaching, but the relationship between human 
beings and the mode of teaching under the influence of humanism will also be chal-
lenged. As J. Li (2020 ) said, ‘Teaching is closely related to one’s beliefs, values, teaching 
goals, and relationship with students, and changes in teaching methods and teaching 
methods may break traditional teaching and trigger emotional reactions.’ We also found 
that a person’s environment has a lot to do with how he or she may view the use of AI in 
teaching practices and that different regional higher education environments may hold 
different views (Peng 2022 ). As Ma Xu and Ren Yuxiao mentioned in this article, their 
college has established the AIGC Dance Creative Teaching Laboratory. In contrast, 
colleagues of He Yang and Yao Yuzhong felt that it was not a ‘serious’ teaching activity 
and raised concerns about the destruction of traditional culture.
The role that generative AI, like ChatGPT, might play in higher education still needs 
to be critically explored. N. Zhang (2017 ) suggested that educators and education 
researchers should consider the inclusiveness and valuable space that teaching reform 
can bring to teachers’ teaching and students’ learning. With the above perspectives in 12
 X. MA ET AL.
mind, we explore the different teaching and learning experiences that ChatGPT may 
bring to teachers and students in China and Thailand, which are related to the spatial and 
social constructs that ChatGPT may create.
Multi-cultural considerations in virtual space production and social 
construction provided by ChatGPT for teaching and learning
The virtual space production created by ChatGPT is also the main point of our discussion. 
ChatGPT provides a new powerful virtual space for creativity and production (B. Liu and 
Cui 2023 ). In the conversation for this article, Ma Xu said that the students in his class said 
that ‘when creating dance, learning to use ChatGPT can better provide us with ideas and 
speed up our creation.’ Ren Yuxiao mentioned that in a ‘dance creativity’ course in 
May 2023, he and Ma Xu had their 30 students receive responses from ChatGPT on 
their own individual pages. Due to the efficient functioning of the AI model, ChatGPT 
provided each student with distinct ideas, each with its own unique characteristics. He 
Yang also highlighted in the conversation for this article that he and Yao Yuzhong changed 
TED to students using ChatGPT live in the ‘dance creativity’ course in January 2024 and 
gave talks based on the results of live use. These ‘ideas’ obtained on ChatGPT’s platform, as 
well as the presentation of results based on the ‘ideas’ received from ChatGPT, are a kind of 
virtual space production (X. Zhou 2022 ). Also, in teaching and learning, students actively 
carry out ‘virtual space production practice’ in the process of virtual space production. 
Virtual space production practice is an extension of virtual space production, which refers 
to the practical activities of social production in a virtual environment (Cao and Fan 2023 ). 
As Yao Yuzhong mentioned in the previous dialogue, the students asked ChatGPT 
questions and then gave instructions to ChatGPT to produce pictures according to the 
creative text provided by ChatGPT. After receiving the creative text and pictures provided 
by ChatGPT, many students shouted excitedly. This virtual space production practice 
surprised the students in Thailand, and they also experienced the empowerment and 
happiness brought by ‘virtual space production practice’ for learning. Ren Yuxiao also 
shared in the previous conversation that the students asked ChatGPT to provide creative 
text and generate pictures, and then synthesized them into short videos with the ‘cutting’ 
software and matched them with suitable background music and got a creative short dance 
video of ‘Ke mu san’. The students shared the short video of the creative ‘Ke mu san’ dance 
on China’s Tiktok platform, where members of the public sent messages, interacted, liked 
and participated in the students’ online communities. Through these teaching and learning 
experiences, it can be seen that the above Chinese and Thai students’ practice of using 
ChatGPT in their learning is driven by digital technology and virtual reality technology, so 
that their interests have become digital creativity and transformed into digital cultural 
resources. Virtual space production is carried out in the practice of virtual space (Cao and 
Fan 2023 ).
Although our experiences with ChatGPT in universities in China and Thailand are 
different, we both agree that ChatGPT provides a virtual space for students to be creative 
and productive. However, such ‘virtual space production’ does not always make everyone 
feel so good, and it also presents different expressions in multiple cultures. Su (2024 , 
121–123) once said: ‘Technological development needs to conform to social construc -
tion, and multi-culture makes the use and development of artificial intelligence RESEARCH IN DANCE EDUCATION
 13
influenced by social and cultural factors.’ In the conversation, He Yang mentioned that 
his Thai colleagues felt that this was not a really ‘serious’ teaching activity and raised 
concerns about the destruction of traditional culture.
As John et al. (2024 , 85–92) describe it, ‘a reasonable technology is one that is endowed 
with appropriate behavior, cultural identity, etc. that the general public has understood, 
is socially constructed, and contains cultural elements.’ While focusing on inclusiveness 
and innovation, higher education in Thailand also pays attention to the protection of 
traditional culture, which is the appropriateness of social construction (Yun, Liu, and Liu  
2013 ). Similarly, in Ma Xu’s narration, we also see that ChatGPT may be a ‘disaster’ for 
her and some of Ren Yu xiao's students, because the power of ChatGPT makes some of 
their students feel that they can only choose to ‘lie flat’. As X. Wu (2024 , 257–259) points 
out, ‘The correct use and ethics of artificial intelligence in education also need to think 
and adapt to social construction and cultural factors’. Ma Xu also shared in the previous 
text conversation that the educational environment in China, where she is located, is 
focused on practicality, which is linked to the ‘AI Innovation Action Plan for 
Universities’ launched by the Chinese Ministry of Education in 2018. It emphasizes the 
ability to serve the needs of the country (H. Li and Fan 2018 ). Some students of Ma Xu 
and Ren Yuxiao, after feeling the rapid creativity and generation function of ChatGPT, 
felt that their daily learning of traditional skills to show dance techniques could not 
match the rapid creativity of ChatGPT, and thought that they could not adapt to the 
needs of the current social employment market, so they chose to ‘lie flat’. The above 
manifestations in the teaching and learning experiences of Chinese and Thai teachers and 
students, no matter the anxiety of ‘not serious’ or the helplessness of ‘lying down’, all 
contain factors of social construction. Social construction factors also directly or indir -
ectly influence their reflection on the use and treatment of ChatGPT, which confirms the 
personal factors and social construction in teaching and learning (Rao, Cheng, and Xu  
2023 ). Perhaps there may be a wide range of similarities and differences in any educa -
tional environment, and we as educators may have to continually critically explore them.
While considering the virtual space production and social construction that 
ChatGPT may provide for teaching and learning, it is crucial to pay attention to 
issues of multiculturalism, digital literacy, privacy, and information security. We 
consider that different regions and higher education institutions around the world 
may have different considerations about the use of generative AI, such as ChatGPT, in 
formal higher education practices and what is or is not appropriate. However, as 
generative AI, such as ChatGPT, has gradually become more widespread, global 
higher education will continue to face challenges from generative AI technologies, 
values, and ethics in educational practices.
What dance can bring to the conversation about ChatGPT in a higher 
education setting?
The question of how to explore the discipline of dance in which we work and how to 
provide insights or challenges to the ‘pedagogical dialogue’ of using ChatGPT for 
dance education is a topic we need to explore. From the conversations of the above 
four teachers, it can be seen that ChatGPT is useful for generating the content 
needed in dance teaching, exploring dance creativity and participating in dance 14
 X. MA ET AL.
concept design. These functions may make us as educators inclined to use genera -
tive artificial intelligence, such as ChatGPT, to support our teaching and learning. 
As Ma Xu said in the dialogue, the use of ChatGPT in teaching is not a short stage, 
not to be used as ‘Xi jing’ ‘bait’, but to promote the development of teaching, 
provide students with a variety of learning modes, and promote the opportunity 
to improve students’ learning ability. At the same time, it can also be seen that this 
need has become urgent through the release of China and Thailand in the education 
agenda mentioned by Ma Xu and He Yang in the dialogue (Kongthon 2023 ; 
T. Wang and Ren 2018 ).
When using generative artificial intelligence such as ChatGPT in dance education, we 
also need to consider that the teaching of dance creativity has changed from the original 
creativity of a single person to a learning scene involving human-machine interaction 
through artificial intelligence digital technology. As dance educators, we also see that the 
current artificial intelligence technology cannot fully achieve the human emotions and 
emotional details that can be expressed in creativity (Wan 2024 ). However, the challenge 
for us educators is adapting and transforming our traditional and inherent teaching 
practices. In our teaching practice, we aim not only to provide students with the essential 
content we want them to learn, but also to offer a comprehensive, inclusive, personalized, 
and creative learning experience that resonates with their needs and the social constructs 
they are part of.
The integration of ChatGPT into dance teaching exemplifies the convergence of 
artistic practice and posthuman thought, as highlighted by Tao and Chen (2023 ): 
‘Artistic activities should be posthuman in practice because it brings our artistic practice 
to the field of continuous innovation and inclusiveness.’ Dance learning, like many 
disciplines, thrives on creativity, and adopting a posthuman perspective allows for 
transcending the limitations of humanism to embrace greater inclusivity. Furthermore, 
the application of generative AI tools, such as ChatGPT, in higher education presents 
valuable opportunities to inspire innovative ideas, enhance global communication, and 
promote multicultural exchange, fostering an environment of inclusiveness and 
collaboration.
Conclusion
The integration of generative AI, such as ChatGPT, into higher education represents 
a pivotal shift in teaching methodologies, offering opportunities to redefine tradi -
tional pedagogical boundaries and foster innovation. As demonstrated through the 
dual ethnographic exploration in dance education within China and Thailand, gen-
erative AI provides an avenue for expanding teaching concepts, tools, and models. 
However, its adoption necessitates a continuous process of inquiry, evaluation, and 
adaptation. Educators must remain vigilant in assessing the value and implications of 
these technologies while embracing the uncertainties and inclusivity inherent in their 
application. By fostering a positive interplay between human creativity and the 
capabilities of generative AI, higher education institutions can create a more dynamic, 
collaborative, and forward-thinking learning environment. This ongoing exploration 
will be critical in shaping educational practices and policies for an era marked by 
profound technological transformation.RESEARCH IN DANCE EDUCATION
 15
Acknowledgments
I extend my heartfelt gratitude to Ruoxi Cui, a PhD candidate in the Dance Department at the 
University of Auckland, New Zealand, for her invaluable assistance in proofreading this manu -
script. Her meticulous attention to detail and constructive feedback have greatly enhanced the 
quality of this work.
I am also deeply thankful to Dr. Yuzi Lin, Dean of the Arts International College of Krirk 
University in Thailand, for her unwavering support and encouragement throughout the course of 
this research. Her guidance has been instrumental in shaping this study.
Their contributions have been pivotal to the successful completion of this manuscript, and I am 
sincerely appreciative of their time and expertise.
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s). 
Funding
This research was funded by the “Research on the Practical application of AIGC Artificial 
Intelligence in Art Education in China and Thailand” project of Thailand Research Center, 
Chengdu University, China, project number [SPRITS202415].
Foundation
This research was funded by the ‘Research on the Practical application of AIGC Artificial 
Intelligence in Art Education in China and Thailand’ project of Thailand Research Center, 
Chengdu University, China, project number [SPRITS202415].
GLOSSARY
Ke mu san (科目三 )
China’s popular network words,originally part of the motor vehicle driving test, now refers to 
a silky little dance routine that makes you want to dance along. Ke mu san” is also generally 
referred to as exaggerated, demonic, similar to local ‘modern disco’ actions.
Nei juan (内卷
China’s network buzzwords Chinese college students used it to refer to irrational internal 
competition or ‘being willing’ to compete. It is now referred to as the phenomenon of peers 
competing for limited resources, resulting in the decline of individual ‘income effort ratio’. It 
is an ‘inflation’ of effort.
Xi jing (吸睛
A Chinese internet buzzword describes something or an extremely attractive phenomenon that 
can quickly attract people’s attention. 16
 X. MA ET AL.
Notes on contributors
Ma Xu (PhD) is an assistant researcher at the School of Music and Dance at the China-Asean 
College of Arts, Chengdu University, China, focusing on dance education and multiculturalism.
Tuomeiciren Heyang is part-time professor of the Arts International College of Krirk University in 
Thailand. His research interests include dance education; dance ethnography; and comparative 
dance.
Yao Yuzhong is the Associate Dean of the International Faculty at Kela University in Thailand, 
focusing on dance education and student well-being.
Yuxiao Ren is a trainee teacher at the School of Music and Dance at the China-Asean College of 
Arts, Chengdu University, China. He is also working on his PhD. He currently assists Ma Xu in 
teaching and designing the class, focusing on dance education and multiculturalism.
ORCID
Tuomeiciren Heyang 
 http://orcid.org/0000-0001-6887-1505
References
Adeshola, I., and A. P. Adepoju. 2023 . “The Opportunities and Challenges of ChatGPT in 
Education.” Interactive Learning Environments 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1080/10494820.2023. 
2253858  .
Biswas Mellamphy, N. 2021 . “Humans “In the Loop”?: Human-Centrism, Posthumanism, and Ai.” 
Nature and Culture 16 (1): 11–27. https://doi.org/10.3167/nc.2021.160102  .
Braidotti, R. 2016 . “Posthuman Critical Theory.” In Critical Posthumanism and Planetary Futures , 
edited by D. Banerji and M. R. Paranjape, 13–32. Springer India. https://doi.org/10.1007/978- 
81-322-3637-5_2  .
Burleigh, D., and S. Burm. 2022 . “Doing Duoethnography: Addressing Essential Methodological 
Questions.” International Journal of Qualitative Methods 21. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 
16094069221140876  .
Cao, Q., and B. U. Fan. 2023 . “Metaverse: Embodied Practice of Production-Consumption in 
Virtual Space.” Journal of Beijing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics Social Sciences 
Edition 36 (4): 149–154.
Chang, C.-Y., C.-L. Yang, H.-J. Jen, H. Ogata, and G.-H. Hwang. 2024 . “Facilitating Nursing and 
Health Education by Incorporating ChatGPT into Learning Designs.” Educational Technology 
& Society 27 (1): 215–230.
Chen, Y. 2023 . “Educational Reform in the ChatGPT/AIGC Era.” Journal of East China Normal 
University (Educational Sciences) 41 (7): 103–116.
Cheng, M., Y. Zhu, X. Zheng, and S. Huang. 2023 . “From Large Space ‘Entity’ to Large Model 
“Virtual”: Conception of Future Urban Planning and Management in the Context of Artificial 
Intelligence.” Architecture & Culture 8:102–105.
Dempere, J., K. Modugu, A. Hesham, and L. K. Ramasamy. 2023 . “The Impact of ChatGPT on 
Higher Education.” Frontiers in Education 8:1206936. https://doi.org/10.3389/feduc.2023. 
1206936  .
Dube, B., S. Mahlomaholo, W. Setlalentoa, and B. Tarman. 2023 . “Creating Sustainable Learning 
Environments in the Era of the Posthuman: Towards Borderless Curriculum.” Journal of 
Curriculum Studies Research 5 (1), Article 1. i–x. https://doi.org/10.46303/jcsr.2023.1  .
Gao, J. 2021 . The Expression and Influence of the Differences in Chinese and Thai Educational 
Concepts in Thai Chinese Teaching . Xi’an,China: Xi’an Shiyou University.
Gao, Z., and J. Wang. 2023 . “The Dangers and Opportunities of Writing Teaching in the Era of 
Artificial Intelligence.” Shanghai Education 11:60–61.RESEARCH IN DANCE EDUCATION
 17
Graesser, A. C., M. Singer, and T. Trabasso. 1994 . “Constructing Inferences During Narrative Text 
Comprehension.” Psychological Review 101 (3): 371–395. https://doi.org/10.1037//0033-295X. 
101.3.371  .
Herbrechter, S., I. Callus, M. de Bruin-Molé, M. Grech, C. J. Müller, and M. Rossini. 2020 . “Critical 
Posthumanism: An Overview.” In Palgrave Handbook of Critical Posthumanism , edited by 
S. Herbrechter, I. Callus, M. Rossini, M. Grech, M. de Bruin-Molé, and C. J. Müller, 1–24. 
Springer International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-42681-1  .
Hudlicka, E. 2003 . “To Feel or Not to Feel: The Role of Affect in Human-Computer Interaction.” 
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 59 (1): 1–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1071- 
5819(03)00047-8  .
Jiang, L. 2023 . “AI-Driven Educational Reform: The Impact and Prospects of ChatGPT/GPT.” 
Journal of East China Normal University (Educational Sciences) 7:143–150.
John, A. H., M. D. Gregory, L. Chen, and Q. Sheng. 2024 . “Learning Strategies: System Synthesis 
and Conceptual Modeling (Part I).” Digital Education 2:85–92. 85–92.
Kalla, D., N. Smith, F. Samaah, and S. Kuraku. 2023 . “Study and Analysis of Chat GPT and Its 
Impact on Different Fields of Study.” SSRN Scholarly Paper 4402499. Social Science Research 
Network.
Knuuttila, A. 2024 . “The Potential Benefits and Challenges of Adopting AI-Tools Such as 
ChatGPT in Marketing Communications and Search Engine Optimization.”
Kongthon, A. 2023 . “Medical Artificial Intelligence Research Landscape in Thailand: 
A Bibliometric Analysis.” In 2023 18th International Joint Symposium on Artificial 
Intelligence and Natural Language Processing (iSAI-NLP), 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1109/iSAI- 
NLP60301.2023.10354993  .
Kostikova, I., L. Holubnycha, T. Besarab, O. Moshynska, T. Moroz, and I. Shamaieva. 2024 . 
“ChatGPT for Professional English Course Development.” International Journal of Interactive 
Mobile Technologies 18 (2): 68–81. https://doi.org/10.3991/ijim.v18i02.46623  .
Li, H., and L. Fan. 2018 . “Possible” and “Impossible”: A Further Discussion on the Educational 
Value of Artificial Intelligence Technology: Interpretation of the “Innovative Action Plan for 
Artificial Intelligence in Colleges and Universities.” Journal of Distance Education 36 (5): 37–44.
Li, J. 2020 . “Change the Traditional Teaching Model and Build a Smart Learning Environment.” 
China Journal of Multimedia & Network Teaching 6:206–208.
Liu, B., and M. Cui. 2023 . “Virtual Digital Man in the ChatGPT Era: The Intermediary of 
Quasi-Subject to Human Cognition and Behavior.” Journal of Southwest Minzu University 
(Humanities and Social Sciences Edition) 11:126–132.
Liu, S., T. Zhang, X. Zhou, and X. Yang. 2006 . “On the Nature and Significance of Academic 
Exchange.” Science & Technology Association Forum 8:7–8.
Liu, Y. 2023 . “ChatGPT, which Can Be Used for Writing Papers and Chatting, Has Become Very 
Popular, and These Art Majors are Even More Popular.” Study Abroad Z1:68–70.
Liu, Y., and Z. Lin. 2023 . “Data Security Risks and Legal Governance of Generative Big Models.” 
Cyber Security and Data Governance 42 (12).
Lowe, R. J., M. Kiczkowiak, and X. Lu. 2016 . “Native-Speakerism and the Complexity of Personal 
Experience: A Duoethnographic Study.” Cogent Education 3 (1): 1264171. https://doi.org/10. 
1080/2331186X.2016.1264171  .
Muangmee, C., S. Kot, N. Meekaewkunchorn, N. Kassakorn, S. Tiranawatananun, and B. Khalid. 
2021 . “Students’ Use Behavior Towards E-Learning Tools During COVID-19 Pandemics: Case 
Study of Higher Educational Institutions of Thailand.” International Journal of Evaluation & 
Research in Education 10 (4): 1166–1175. https://doi.org/10.11591/ijere.v10i4.21821  .
Nath, R., and R. Manna. 2023 . “From Posthumanism to Ethics of Artificial Intelligence.” AI & 
Society 38 (1): 185–196. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00146-021-01274-1  .
Peng, J. 2022 . “The Impact of New Generation Artificial Intelligence on Higher Education and 
Risk Prevention.” The Guide of Science & Education 9:53–54.
Rao, Y., C. Cheng, and S. Xu. 2023 . “Systematic Thinking on the Construction of Skill-Based 
Society.” Journal of Vocational Education 8:14–20.18
 X. MA ET AL.
Rodriguez-Sarmiento, L. F., I. Galpin, and V. Sanchez-Riaño. 2024 . “Mapping Brand Territories 
Using ChatGPT.” In Applied Informatics , edited by H. Florez and M. Leon, 31–46. Springer 
Nature Switzerland. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-46813-1_3  .
Runa, H. J., and R. Martin. 2021 . “A Tale of Grappling: Performative Duoethnography as 
Expanded Methodological Thinking.” Reconceptualizing Educational Research Methodology 
12 (2). https://doi.org/10.7577/rerm.4683  .
Shen, X. 2023 . “The Artificial Intelligence of New Generation and the Liberation 
Man-Philosophical Reflection on the ChatGPT Craze.” Gansu Theory Research 3:72–81.
Shi, H. 2020 . “Dance and Body in the Context of Artificial Intelligence.” Dance 2:54–61.
Stahl, G. K., and M. L. Maznevski. 2021 . “Unraveling the Effects of Cultural Diversity in Teams: 
A Retrospective of Research on Multicultural Work Groups and an Agenda for Future 
Research.” Journal of International Business Studies 52 (1): 4–22. https://doi.org/10.1057/ 
s41267-020-00389-9  .
Su, H. 2024 . “Research on the Teaching of Information Technology Courses in Higher Vocational 
Colleges Empowered by Artificial Intelligence Technology.” Wencun Reading 121–123.
Tao, Y., and W. Chen. 2023 . “Posthumanism and the Future of Art Philosophy: The Conflict and 
Integration of Tradition and Modernity.” Painting & Calligraphy Art 6:30–34.
Wan, Y. 2024 . Exploration of Artistic Creation from the Perspective of Artificial Intelligence. Master . 
Yantai,China: Yantai University.
Wang, K. 2024 . Feasibility Analysis of the Application of Artificial Intelligence Technology in College 
Sports Dance Teaching , 181–183. Vol. 23. Science & Technology of Stationery & Sporting Goods.
Wang, K., and F. Jiang. 2023 . “Digital Dance Creation and Performance Under the Background of 
AI Technology.” Humanistic World 8:52–58.
Wang, S. 2023a . “The Technical Route, Security Risk and Prevention of ChatGPT’s Intervention in 
Ideological and Political Education.” Shenzhen University Journal (Humanities & Social 
Sciences) 40 (2): 153–160.
Wang, T., and Y. Ren. 2018 . “Talent Strategy in the Age of Artificial Intelligence: Interpretation of 
the ‘Innovative Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence in Colleges and universities’.” Journal of 
Distance Education 36 (5): 52–59.
Wang, T., Z. Song, and Z. Jin. 2024 . “From Disorder, Subversion to Reengineering.” Structural 
Transformation of Journalism Through Generative Artificial Intelligence Journal News Research 
15 (2): 7–9.
Wang, W. 2023. “ChatGPT the Application Value, Potential Risks and Coping Strategies in 
College Students.” Mental Health Education Journal of Jinzhou Medical University 21 (5): 78–83.
Wei, J.-H., A. V. Lacaste, I. N. Rodliyah, H. T. Nguyen, and H.-H. Chuang. 2022 . “Teachers’ 
Multicultural Experience, Creative Teaching, and Cultural Intelligence: A Study of Four Asia- 
Pacific Countries.” Thinking Skills and Creativity 46:101144. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tsc.2022. 
101144  .
Wu, T., S. He, J. Liu, S. Sun, K. Liu, Q.-L. Han, and Y. Tang. 2023 . “A Brief Overview of ChatGPT: 
The History, Status Quo and Potential Future Development.” IEEE/CAA Journal of Automatica 
Sinica 10 (5): 1122–1136. https://doi.org/10.1109/JAS.2023.123618  .
Wu, X. 2024 . “Research on Ethical Issues of Moral Enhancement of Artificial Intelligence.” 
Modern Business Trade Industry 17:257–259.
Xie, Y., and X. Wang. 2024 . “The Ethical Risks of Artificial Intelligence Emotion and Their 
Countermeasures.” Studies in Ethics 1:132–140.
Xu, D., and X. Duan. 2024 . “Artificial Intelligence Fluency: Challenges and Strategies for Higher 
Education: The Interpretation and Enlightenment of ‘2024 Educause Horizon Report: Teaching 
and Learning Edition’.” Open Education Research 30 (3): 24–36.
Yun, J., X. Liu, and Y. Liu. 2013 . “Computational Modeling of a Social Phenomenon: Evolution of 
Cultural Identity and Cultural Territory.” Journal of Computer Research and Development 
12:2590–2602.
Zeb, A., R. Ullah, and R. Karim. 2024 . “Exploring the Role of ChatGPT in Higher Education: 
Opportunities, Challenges and Ethical Considerations.” The International Journal of RESEARCH IN DANCE EDUCATION
 19
Information and Learning Technology 41 (1): 99–111. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJILT-04-2023- 
0046  .
Zeng, D. 2024 . “Artificial Intelligence Technology Empowers Research on Dance Performance 
Art.” Hebei Pictorial Hebei Pictorial 14:160–162.
Zhang, N. 2017 . “Education Reform and Development from an International Perspective–A 
Review of ‘Overview of World Education Reform’.” Journal of Kaili University 35 (5): 185–186.
Zhang, Y., J. You, and J. Wang. 2024 . “ChatGPT Empowers Ideological and Political Education in 
Universities: How is it Possible, Changes in Connotation and Logical Evolution.” Journal of 
Shandong Education Institute 1:9–15.
Zhao, M., and Y. Xing. 2024 . “Study on the Development of Home Community-Based Elderly 
Care Service Enabled by Artificial Intelligence and Optimization Strategy of Its Ecosystem.” 
Social Security Studies 2:16–25.
Zheng, Z., Q. Fan, and W. Jia. 2024 . “The Triple Illusion and Solution of Artificial Intelligence 
Technology Empowering Teacher Development.” China Educational Technology 7:18–34.
Zhou, X. 2022 . “Research on the Production of Virtual Space of the Chinese Horror Game 
Paranormal HK.” Master, Lanzhou University.20
 X. MA ET AL.
