Citation: Dzhimova, Mariya, and
Francisco Tigre Moura. 2024.
Calculated Randomness, Control and
Creation: Artistic Agency in the Age
of Artificial Intelligence. Arts 13: 152.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
arts13050152
Academic Editor: Andrew M. Nedd
Received: 26 July 2024
Revised: 27 September 2024
Accepted: 30 September 2024
Published: 2 October 2024
Copyright: ©2024 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
arts 
Article
Calculated Randomness, Control and Creation: Artistic Agency
in the Age of Artificial Intelligence
Mariya Dzhimova1,* and Francisco Tigre Moura2
1Institute for Cultural Management and Media, University of Music and Performing Arts Munich,
Arcisstraße 12, 80333 Munich, Germany
2Business Administration and Economics, IU International University of Applied Sciences,
Mülheimerstraße 38, 53604 Bad Honnef, Germany; francisco.tigre-moura@iu.org
*Correspondence: mariya.dzhimova@hmtm.de
Abstract: The recent emergence of generative AI, particularly prompt-based models, and its embed-
ding in many social domains and practices has revived the notion of co-creation and distributed
agency already familiar in art practice and theory. Drawing on Actor-Network Theory (ANT) and its
central notion of agency, this article explores the extent to which the collaboration between the artist
and AI represents a new form of co-creation and distributed agency. It compares AI art with artistic
movements such as Dada, Surrealism, Minimalism and Conceptual Art, which also challenged the
notion of the autonomous artist and her agency by incorporating randomness on the one hand and
rule-based systems on the other. In contrast, artistic practice with AI can be described as an iterative
process of creative feedback loops, oscillating between order and disorder, (calculated) randomness
and calculation, enabling a very specific kind of self-reflection and entanglement with the alienation
of one’s own perspective. Furthermore, this article argues that most artistic projects that explore and
work with AI are, in their own specific way, a demonstration of hybridity and entanglement, as well
as the distribution of agency between the human and the non-human, and can thus be described as a
network phenomenon.
Keywords: artificial intelligence; artistic agency; actor network theory; distributed authorship;
human-machine collaboration; co-creation
1. Introduction
In recent years, the rise of AI technologies and their use in artistic practices has sparked
a debate regarding the concept of authorship, among the wider public and the art world. It
is not only the economic and legal issues of authorship and the related question of copyright
that are being discussed and negotiated, but also the question of artistic authorship. In this
debate, traditional categories of value, such as autonomy (free self-expression), sovereignty,
agency and control, derived from the aesthetics of genius, are repeatedly used to attribute
artistic authorship to AI or, at the same time, to write it off (Blank 2024, p. 293). From one
perspective, AI is disqualified as a creator, an artist, grounded on the assumption that AI can
only generate a recombination of the existing (i.e., the training data), and therefore does not
fulfil the classical criteria of artistic authorship such as individuality, (absolute) originality
and novelty. At the same time, it is pointed out that human authors operate in a similar
way, because they do not create ex nihilo. Artists also have a socio-culturally shaped space
of experience, characterized by a cultural-historical framework, from which they draw and
create something new through the (opaque) process of recombination (Mersch 2019).
However, the recent emergence of generative AI and, in particular, prompt-based
models, and their embedding in many social domains and practices, has shifted the focus
of the debate from the question of whether AI is capable of being creative and capable of
producing art, and whether or not the role of the artist can be ascribed to it, to the question
of collaboration, human-machine co-creation, and distributed agency. There are certainly
Arts 2024 ,13, 152. https://doi.org/10.3390/arts13050152 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/arts
Arts 2024 ,13, 152 2 of 12
different positions on these issues. While some authors argue that in human-machine
collaboration, AI is merely a tool controlled by the human actor, the artist, and that AI is
merely an extension of human creativity (Muscutt and Cope 2007), others argue that both
human and machine shape the creative process in interaction, emphasizing a distribution
of agency and control (Schröter 2021). Another position points out that although AI shapes
the process and creation of the work through its agency, it is still the human artist who
has the aesthetic control and responsibility (Misselhorn 2023). Despite divergent opinions,
co-creation, co-creativity and distributed agency are currently gaining relevance as concepts
in public discourse as AI has become widely adopted in many social practices and realms,
far beyond art.
However, the concepts of co-creation and distributed agency are not new to practice,
reflection and theory in art. For example, when considering art movements such as
Appropriate Arts and Ready Made but also different formats of collective subjects and
diverse artistic approaches involving interactive works with machines, computers and
automated production processes, as well as the debates on authorship promoted by Roland
Barthes and Michel Foucault in the late 1960s (Blank 2024; Misselhorn 2023).
Against this background, the question arises as to why the use of AI technologies
in artistic practice has revived the concept of co-creation and distributed agency, already
known in theory and practice, and to what extent this is related to the fact that collaboration
between artists and AI might represent a new form of co-creation and distributed agency.
In a first step, this article will critically reflect on the concept of distributed agency
and, in particular, outline the Actor-Network Theory, since various actors, such as artists,
but also curators, art critics, etc., often refer to this theory and its concepts to describe
the collaboration between artist and AI. In a second step, the article will turn to practice
and briefly sketch artistic approaches such as Dada, Surrealism, but also Minimalism and
Conceptual Art, which in their practice have questioned the autonomy and authorship
of the artist over the artistic process. Taking into account the theoretical considerations
of Rottmann (2023), this sketch will focus on the role of the artist and the artistic self,
as well as the relationship to control or delegation of control over the artistic process.
Finally, the third section, will address the question of to what extent artistic work with
contemporary AI (such as generative deep models), represents a new mode of co-creation
and distribution of agency between humans and machines when compared to the artistic
approaches described above.
2. Actor-Network Theory (ANT) and Its Implication for AI Art
Actor-network Theory (ANT) is a theoretical and methodological approach developed
by Science and Technology Studies (STS) scholars Michel Callon, Bruno Latour, John Law
and others (Callon and Latour 1981, 1992; Callon 1986; Law 1986). The basic idea of this
approach is that society consists not only of social relations, but also of constantly shifting
hybrid networks, i.e., connections and dependencies between humans, but also between
non-human entities such as material things, technical artefacts or discursive concepts
(Callon and Latour 1992). The process leading to the construction of an actor-network
is described as a transformative process in which the activities of all the actors involved
mutually enable and constrain each other, thereby changing each other. Actors do not
precede their networking; they are produced by the networking process. The emphasis is
therefore on the unity of actor and network and on the term ‘actor-network’. Although
ANT, as Hensel and Schröter (2012) noted, consists of a variety of different approaches and
reformulations, which later also led to post-ANT (Law and Hassard 1999), the discussion
involving AI art and the associated question of co-creation and distributed authorship is
primarily related to one of its central concepts, namely the notion of agency. According
to ANT, and especially according to Latour’s reading, “ anything that does modify a state of
affairs by making a difference is an actor ” (Latour 2005, p. 71). Thus, agency is attributed to
both human and non-human entities.
Arts 2024 ,13, 152 3 of 12
This does not mean that ANT postulates that things and machines are to be regarded
as subjects and social actors and that people are to be treated as objects, but that it assumes
an interweaving of humans and non-humans that form a network. One of Latour’s popular
examples of such entanglement is the man with the gun: neither the man nor the gun
alone kills, but the interweaving of both entities, with their specific potential for action,
so that the act of murder can take place (Latour 2006). Thus, by focusing on the network
and its constant recomposition, ANT attempts to overcome the common subject-object
dichotomy. In this respect, as noted by Hensel and Schröter (2012), ANT is seen less as
a theory than as an “ anti-reductionist heuristic ” that is concerned with the description of
actor networks. Applied to the context of art, this means, in a very abbreviated form, that
all the entities, such as the artist, the studio, and all the materials, objects, technologies,
tools, infrastructures, etc. involved in the practice, form an actor-network in a dialogue-
based process in which agency is distributed. Neither does the artist have a finished
idea in her head, which she merely translates into materiality through complete control
of the instruments, nor do the instruments and objects completely determine the artist’s
creative possibilities. Rather, depending on the configuration of the given network, the
artist’s agency is expanded, shifted, supplemented, modified, or—to use the vocabulary of
ANT—‘translated’ (Callon 1986).
Inspired by ANT some empirical studies examine the role of non-humans involved
in the artistic process, revealing that the agency of materiality, and engagement with it,
is crucial to the process by which artworks are created (Rubio 2012; Yaneva 2003a, 2003b;
Schürkmann 2018; Lehmann 2012; Berger 2012). For example, Rubio (2012), in his study
of the production of Robert Smithson’s earthwork sculpture “Spiral Jetty” (1970), shows
that the concrete form of the artwork was not a simple and direct mechanical realization
of an abstract idea in the artist’s mind, but that the artwork unfolded step by step as
a result of the various practical problems and constraints, but also the possibilities and
solutions that emerged from working with certain technologies and materials. So, the
site and the materiality functioned as “ affordances ” in the sense of Gibson ([1979] 2014),
which made certain ways of thinking and acting possible. Accordingly, the artistic creative
process is defined as a distributed process between humans and non-human entities that
are interwoven in a network. Thus, there are neither subjects who completely control
materiality and their environment, nor determining technologies and objects, but rather
actor networks, an interplay between humans and non-humans or, in the terminology of
Pickering (2012), a “ dance of agency ” in which (human) actors alternate between phases of
activity and passivity and in which human and material agency mutually condition and
enable each other in an interplay of resistance and adaptation.
However, assuming that the distribution of agency applies to social practices in general,
and therefore to art in particular (and thus to all art practices), two interrelated questions
arise: whether, and if so, what is different or novel about the co-creation between the
artist and AI; and why does the long-known concept of distributed agency and authorship
become relevant precisely in the current context of AI and its use in artistic practice?
We defend that in the artistic process in general the materials and tools involved
have an agency, be it through their resistance (Pickering 1995) or their affordances (Gibson
[1979] 2014), and thus exercise control in the creative process without the human actor (the
artist), having actively transferred this agency and control to them. In the case of AI art,
however, the delegation of autonomy and control to the non-human, (the AI), is intended
by the artist. Certainly, the reasons for this delegation of autonomy and control may be very
different and vary depending on the artistic approach. However, in the use of AI systems in
artistic practice, there appears to be two types of delegation of control: (a) the unintentional
delegation of control, on the one hand and (b) the intentional delegation of control on the
other, or in Morris’s ([1970] 2010, p. 88) terminology, a ‘ controlled loss of control ’. For example,
the work “Teratoma” (2017) by the artist Mario Klingemann ends up in black and white, as
he noted, not because he intended it that way from the start, but because this decision arose
in the course of the artist’s examination of the limits and resistances of the materialities
Arts 2024 ,13, 152 4 of 12
involved, in this case in the course of the training process of the generative neural networks
he used for this work (Klingemann 2017). Just as Pickering (1995) characterizes scientific
practice in his theoretical approach as a dialectical process of resistance and adaptation,
which he metaphorically describes as “the mangle of practice”, in which goals are not
fixed at the outset, but evolve and transform in the temporal confrontation between human
intentionality and the resistance of materiality, Mario Klingemann (2023) also describes the
use of AI, in this case generative neural networks, in his artistic practice.
“Once I had enough training material the next challenge was the training. It turned out
that training a model is not as straightforward as it sounds like. It often felt like trying to
put down a too-large carpet into a room that is too small: there was always some bubble
popping up somewhere and if you flattened it then it popped up in a different corner. In
practice this meant for example that I had managed to get my face model to generate very
convincing eyes, but then it created nasty artefacts in the smoother skin areas. Trying
to fix that by training more or changing the architecture resulted in nice skin details,
but suddenly the eyes got smudged again. There seemed to be a limit as for how much
such a model could learn which is for example the reason why the “Teratoma” series
is black-and-white: by not having to learn color the model had more capacity to focus
on textures.”
This kind of agency and control described by Mario Klingemann (2023), which the
tool exercises over the creative process and shapes it, happens without the artist having
actively delegated this agency and control to the tool. The resistances of materiality and
the resulting deviations from the artistic concept occur unexpectedly and unpredictably.
They are initially a disturbance to which the artist has to adapt, rather than an inspiration.
Certainly, this disturbance may later prove to be a source of inspiration, but above all
it is a resistance of the materiality that the artist did not expect. And this mode of loss
of control over the creative process different from the intentional delegation of control,
in which the artist has decided from the outset to work with a tool, in this case an AI,
that is expected to produce the unexpected, the surprising, the unthinkable, since a key
characteristic of contemporary AI is its opaque and incomprehensible mode of operation.
In addition, contemporary neural networks can perform complex transformations, i.e., find
complex correlations in the data that humans would not even think of, and thus achieve
new and surprising results. This also applies to Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
as a particular group of artificial neural networks, introduced by (Goodfellow et al. 2014),
which are able to generate new data from input and have therefore been widely used by
artists in the last decade.
Working with AI, and particularly GANs, means that the artist is intentionally collabo-
rating with a non-human entity whose functioning is often incomprehensible and therefore
influences the creative process in unpredictable ways, leading to results that are beyond the
artist’s control. However, it is the artist who has intended this state of loss of control over
the creative process and the production of the unexpected. The unexpected is therefore to
some extent to be expected, it is calculated by the artist. Indeed, artists often point to the
unpredictability inherent in neural networks and their emergent properties as what makes
AI interesting as an artistic medium. The artist Roman Lipski (2024), for example, argues
that “ the beauty of using AI as an artistic tool lies in the constant surprise it brings ”.
However, this characteristic of working with AI, namely the calculated unexpected
and the deliberate delegation of control over the creative process, is not exclusive to AI art,
but has a long tradition in art.
3. The Aesthetics of Surprise and the Overcoming of the Boundaries of the Artistic Self
The intended delegation of human autonomy and control to non-humans and the
resulting unpredictable, unimaginable, unexplored, surprising etc. results are not new
in art practice. Rather, the “ aesthetics of surprise ”, as Rottmann (2023) argues, has a long
tradition in art and encompasses a variety of different artistic practices and art movements
as well as analog and digital art forms. Examples of such artistic approaches include Dada,
Arts 2024 ,13, 152 5 of 12
Surrealism, Action Painting, but also Minimalism and Conceptual Art, as well as so-called
Generative Art, which, according to Galanter (2016), is not limited to computer-based or
high-tech art.
Although these artistic approaches are very heterogeneous, using different processes
and techniques and practiced in different historical, cultural and technological contexts,
many of these artistic practices share a similar motive: That is, the delegation of (partial)
control over the creative process and the associated claim to overcome the boundaries of
the artistic self. Representatives of Dadaism, for example, developed and practiced the
cut-up technique, in which an existing text is cut up and the fragments are then randomly
rearranged to create a new work. Similarly, the Dadaists worked with images by creating
collages and montages that were also based on chance, such as the artist Hans Arp, who
created a series of collages by dropping squares of contrasting paper onto the surface of a
larger sheet and then sticking them where they landed on the page. The introduction of
randomness was a way for the Dadaists to challenge the bourgeois norms of traditional
art production and to question the role of the artist and their (absolute) control over the
artistic process. The Dadaist tradition, based on irrationality and randomness, led to
Surrealism, whose proponents sought to eliminate the “ control of sanity ” (Rottmann 2023)
by referring to the psychological automatism. They considered automatism as a way of
overcoming conscious control of the artistic process and unleashing the creative power of
the unconscious through different methods such as through dreams, hypnosis, drugs, etc.
Surrealists considered this approach as a way of overcoming the culturally, intellectually
and historically shaped boundaries of the artistic self that have been imprinted on it through
socialization, education, culture, etc. Inspired by the Surrealists, the proponents of Action
Painting, above all Jackson Pollock, also left the creation of the picture to randomness,
using an immediate and dynamic painting technique that was considered spontaneous and
intended to limit the artist’s conscious influence on the process of finding form. However,
as Rottmann (2023) notes, the Surrealist technique of automatism and the method of Action
Painting remained in an anthropocentric mode in that the role of the artist with her—
although unconscious—self, her emotions and her spontaneity were crucial to the creation
of the works. This contrasts with subsequent art movements such as Minimalism and
Conceptual Art in the 1960s, which also pursued the motif of overcoming the boundaries
of the artistic self and its limitations and cultural imprints, but by delegating the artist’s
control to an external system that partially automated the artistic process. In this sense,
these art movements claimed to operate in a mode of depersonalization, and externalization
(Rottmann 2023). By delegating some, or all, of the processes within artistic practice to an
external system or rule-based media such as matrices, diagrams, net papers or computer
algorithms, these artistic approaches aimed to remove personal taste and handwriting and
thus subjectivity and personal bias from the artistic process.
Accordingly, the work was to be at least partially self-generating and thus contain
a moment of (self-) surprise. As Morris ([1970] 2010, p. 88) notes, these processes of
automation ‘open up the work and its interaction with the artist’s behavior to additional
forces beyond his personal control’. For example, conceptual artist and theorist Mel Bochner
(1997, p. 8) noted: “ For me, the use of self-generating procedures to make art was a liberation
from the limitations of my own ego. It was an escape from individualism through the objectification
of process .”
Furthermore, the delegation of control over the creative process through the use of a
rule-based system applies not only to Minimalism and Conceptual Art of the 1960s, but
also to Generative Art in general, based on Galanter’s (2016) art theory, according to which
the key element of Generative Art is a system to which the artist relinquishes partial or
complete control. Furthermore, this system could be, as he argues, “ a set of natural language
rules, a computer program, a machine, or other procedural invention, which is set into motion with
some degree of autonomy contributing to or resulting in a completed work of art ” (Galanter 2016,
p. 4).
Arts 2024 ,13, 152 6 of 12
Although the artistic practices and art forms briefly outlined here seek to question
the role of the artists in the creative process as well as to overcome the boundaries of the
artistic self, they do so in very different ways. While the Surrealists, using the method
of automatism, operate in an anthropocentric mode in which the self and self-expression
are at the center, Dada on the one hand, and Minimalism and Conceptual Art on the
other, operate in a mode of externalization, or depersonalization. The focus is not on
the self and its expression, but on an external entity, a system based either on disorder
and randomness, as in the case of Dada, or, by contrast, on rules and order, as in the
case of Minimalism and Conceptual Art. This is not surprising, given that these artistic
movements emerged in very different historical periods, with their own discourses on
art and creativity. While Dada and Surrealism arose out of a rejection of the logical-
rational, conventional and bourgeois understanding of art, Minimalism emerged against
the backdrop of the Cold War, the advent of the computer and cybernetics (Rottmann 2023).
It was also during this period, in the 1950s and 1960s, that creativity was increasingly
seen as a resource and was researched, systematized, instrumentalized and propagated
in various military, psychological, economic and socio-political contexts (Reckwitz 2012;
Mareis and Rottmann 2020). As Rottmann (2023, p. 139) notes, Minimalism not only
addressed aesthetic categories such as authorship and control, but also pointed out that
even a practice based on rule-based systems could produce the unexpected, the unplanned.
It was therefore also a critique of the promise of automation and its associated control
and rationality.
This brief digression should illustrate that the intentional delegation of autonomy
and control, and thus working with the unexpected, the unthinkable, with an aesthetic of
self-surprise, has a long tradition in art history and is not unique to artistic practice with
AI. However, given the different contemporary discourses on creativity from those of the
early 20th century or the 1960s, and the rapid technological developments in the field of AI,
it is to be assumed that collaboration with contemporary artificial neural networks unfold
in new ways, and that the reasons for working artistically with autonomous systems and
thus with an aesthetic of the self-surprise are quite different.
4. The Process of Oscillation between Control and Controlled Loss of Control as a
Specific “Dance of Agency”
The term AI art encompasses very heterogeneous practices and, in this sense, art forms,
as the various artists come from different fields and have different technological, media
or visual art backgrounds, use a range of different technologies and applications, pursue
different goals and, accordingly, have very different artistic approaches. As Ploin et al.
(2022, p. 30) illustrate in their study, some artists write their own algorithms from scratch,
others use off-the-shelf algorithms, and third use existing algorithms but modify them for
their own purposes. In addition, the artists trained the models on existing, curated or self-
created data sets. Furthermore, artists work and experiment with AI in very different ways,
with fundamentally different attitudes objectives from experimental-exploratory to critical-
reflective, resulting in different aesthetics (Scorzin 2023). As curator Laura Elliott (2022,
p. 83) noted, “ some technical artists, such as Mario Klingemann and Alexander Mordvintsev,
focused on aesthetic novelty and beauty, while critical media artists, such as Coralie Vogelaar and
Constant Dullaart, were more concerned with the commentary, meaning and history within each
work .” Furthermore, the artistic exploration of AI spans more than a decade, if we consider
the introduction of machine learning architectures such as deep neural networks in the
second half of the 2010s and the provision of more accessible technologies to artists as a
point in time. In addition, there were artists such as Harold Cohen and David Cope who
were already working with AI in the 1970s and 1980s.
However, despite the wide temporal range and heterogeneity of AI art practices, there
seems to be something that many of these practices have in common, namely the motive of
working with AI to push the boundaries of one’s artistic self and the limits of one’s artistic
approach. Mario Klingemann (2023), for example compares AI with “ a ‘parascope’—an
Arts 2024 ,13, 152 7 of 12
instrument of inspection—that allows us to observe and discover things which are beyond our reach,
such as the microscope or the telescope did before ”. The artist Sofia Crespo (2023) also refers to
the microscope to illustrate that both the AI and the microscope make things visible that
cannot be seen with the naked eye. Similarly, the artist Memo Akten (2018) describes AI
as an “extension of our mind and body”. The artist Kevin Abosch (2023) explains how he
started working artistically with AI and points out that he saw AI as an opportunity to
expand his own artistic practice.
“My exploration into AI is part of a broader quest to understand my identity and how I
connect with the world. Years ago, I began to wonder what would happen if I fed my own
photographs, taken with intention and care, into a machine. Would it be possible for the
machine to learn from my imagery and then generate new works that are extensions of my
art? I wanted to see if the resulting creations would evoke an emotional connection for
me. This experimentation started years ago with early generative adversarial networks.”
Referring to the ability of generative deep models to recognize patterns at different
levels of abstraction in huge amounts of data, and thus to make this data extraction tangible,
as well as the ability of these models to rearrange elements in new ways and to generate
new, “ unthinkable ” variations through randomness, many artists describe working with AI
as an extension of their own personal or even human perspective. As the artist Feileacan
McCormick (2022) from the artistic duo Entangled Others noted:
“It (AI) allows us to make tangible the distilled essence of vast swaths of data that would
be incomprehensibly complex to us as human individuals in a manner that is possible to
interact with intuitively. ( . . .) We see a lot of our work as trying to find ways of using
systems in order to augment our creative process, to externalise certain parts of what
would otherwise be an entirely internal personal practice and thus be able to explore with
a far vaster range of potential variation (thanks to randomness) through constructing
feedback loops that explore the many different ways of creating performative rulesets.”
By incorporating generative deep models such as GANs or diffusion models into their
own artistic practice, artists are delegating control of the artistic process to an external
system, similar to Dada, but also to Minimalism and Conceptual Art, i.e., in a mode of
externalization. However, there seems to be also differences at a practical or operational
levels. According to Galanter (2016) and his reference to complexity theory, neural networks
are complex systems that combine order and disorder at the same time. On the one hand,
similar to Dada, randomness plays a central role, because the incorporation of randomness
into deep neural networks is crucial to their ability to output multiple possibilities from
the same input, generating variation rather than the same result over and over again. At
this point, the processuality of the machine, of the system, is beyond the artist’s control.
Many artists describe this delegation of control as inspiring and see it as an opportunity
to develop ideas beyond their own perspectives. For example, the artist Kevin Abosch
(2023) notes: “ Control with AI is different. It’s not about mastery over craft but about embracing
the unknown and integrating it into the creative workflow. ( . . .) Artists who are not afraid of the
unknown and who can work with this lack of control will master the use of AI in their art ”.
On the other hand, generative deep models are certainly not purely random systems
without rules. Although their rules are often opaque, there are many levels at which the
artist has control over the process, such as designing the model’s architecture, creating the
data set, and conducting model training. Furthermore, by directly modifying the latent
vector as in the case of GANs, the artist can exert some control over navigation through
the so-called latent space—the space in which the high-dimensional data—such as an
image—is distilled into a low-dimensional space in its essential characteristics. Thus, in
the case of GANs artist can directly manipulate even the generative process. In fact, the
act of selecting a particular trajectory through the latent space can be observed in many
artistic practices, as for example in the work “Three Latent Body Problem” (2019) by Mario
Klingemann, where the process of creation is made tangible (Klingemann 2019).
Arts 2024 ,13, 152 8 of 12
Thus, in contrast to Minimal and Conceptual artists such as Carl Andre, Mel Bochner,
Roberth Smithson, Sol Lewitt, (to name just a few), who use simple, highly ordered
geometric, numerical and combinatorial systems as generative elements in their work
(Galanter 2016), AI artists work with complex systems that combine rules and order on the
one hand, and randomness and disorder on the other.
Accordingly, artistic practice with AI can be described as a constant interplay of
(calculated) randomness and calculation, as a dialectical process that oscillates between
control and deliberate loss of control. The artist Refik Anadol (2020), for example, uses the
term ‘controlled randomness’ to describe this process:
“I would say that I use data as pigments in my work. Data and file formats are pigments
and these pigments can take many different forms. Data is not just a series of a few
piles of numbers, but always a calculation. Calculation and computer systems are
always calculation, that is somehow in the nature of things. But it is rather controlled
randomness. That’s how I end up with individual works, for example. ( . . .) When you
bring together the frontier of imagination with that of what is technically possible and
these two worlds collide, then you have exactly this chance discovery. This moment is not
so easy to calculate. But when it happens: Eureka!”
Furthermore, working with AI is also described by many artists as an iterative process,
characterized by continuous feedback loops between input and output and in this sense
between the artist and the tool. The artists prompt the AI to generate the preliminary
output they are looking for, but the AI’s often unexpected output prompts them to adapt
the idea, change it, or even redirect and rearrange the artistic workflow. For example, the
artist Roope Rainisto (2024) notes:
“I have some idea that I want to do these types of pictures, for instance in Vacation. But
it’s only when I start to create, and I see the results, I see the choices. And after I do that 5
times or 10 times, each time I go deeper and deeper. I might then change my plans, or find
something that was much more interesting than the thing that I had in my mind the first
place. And I don’t think that’s a bad thing. That’s a good thing. It’s a feature, it makes AI
art interesting, and you start to go deeper and deeper. And I think that’s the way almost
all AI artists that start with AI work. ( . . .) But I think that the more time you spend with
this, the more you start to feel the urge to go deeper and start to explore or to need to
create something that feels more personal to you. And that’s why I find this process so
much more fascinating than writing poems or books or playing in bands, writing songs
and so on. I’ve done a lot of arts, but I just find this process to be so fascinating.”
The feedback loops enable the artists to learn and explore not only the AI’s mode
of operation, but also their own artistic practice, their own role within the practice and
their own aesthetic preferences and biases, which unconsciously flow into the process and
influence the different decisions. The system thus enables a mode of aesthetic self-reflection.
On the one hand, the machine learns the aesthetic strategies and preferences of the artist
and imitates them; on the other hand, it produces unpredictable deviations from them, to
which the artist can react in an ongoing process. As the artist Kevin Abosch (2023) notes:
“While AI is a tool, it does influence the art significantly. Artists using AI may talk about
collaborating with the machine, but I think this is an anthropomorphization I disagree
with. The artist brings their experience, intention, and narrative to the table, while the AI,
as a mirror/prism, reflects and distorts this input, often revealing a complex reflection of
the artist’s subconscious. The process changes how artists perceive and feel, permanently
altering their perspective.”
As Schröter (2021) notes with reference to Frederic Jameson (1991), this is a “ surrealism
without the unconscious ”, but in a new way, namely under highly technological conditions—
“the artist is split here into “himself” and a virtual double that imitates and transcends him. He
does not express himself, but is reflected in an active mirror ”. The artist Feileacan McCormick
(2022) argues in a very similar way: “ These feedback loops, wherein we input data into a certain
Arts 2024 ,13, 152 9 of 12
system or ruleset and intuitively navigate the outputs, become a means of continuously exploring
just how much machines can surprise, but also more crucially, hold up a mirror to our own aesthetic
preferences and biases ”. Similarly, the artist Anna Ridler (2022) described working with AI:
“It is my work but also not my work—recognizably me (especially the first one (image)) but nothing
I would have been able to do by myself. Watching it is a very odd sensation like catching a glimpse
of yourself in a mirror before you realize it is you ”.
Accordingly, AI artists also seek to access the unconscious, however unlike the Surre-
alists, not to unleash its creative power, but to reflect on and critically question unconscious
personal (aesthetic) preferences and prejudices in particular, but also the human anthro-
pocentric perspective in general. By embedding a complex technology such as AI, which
can recognize regularities and mirroring the biases and limitations of one’s own artistic
practice and is also capable of unpredictability and unexpected rearrangements through
randomness, AI is seen as a way of creating space for the expansion of one’s own hu-
man perspective by entangling it with machine vision and, in this sense, with the non-
human perspective.
Accordingly, working with AI can be described as an iterative process of creative
feedback loops, oscillating between order and disorder, chance and calculation, control
and controlled loss of control, thus enabling a very specific kind of self-reflection and
entanglement with the alienation of one’s own perspective. Thus, the distribution of agency
is not exclusively specific to artistic work with AI, but artistic practice with AI is nonetheless
a specific ‘dance of agency’ (Pickering 2012) that takes place in a particular configuration of
human and non-human entities, which has only been hinted at in this article and requires
in-depth empirical and ethnographic investigation.
5. AI as “Network Phenomenon”
The artistic practice using and incorporating contemporary AI such as deep generative
models is characterised by its own specific ‘dance of agency’, described here as a process of
creative feedback loops oscillating between computational order and randomness. Further-
more, this entanglement, this process of oscillation between control and controlled loss of
control, and in this sense the distribution of autonomy and agency, is not something that
remains concealed in the artist’s studio but is staged and demonstrated in most artistic
projects. And that brings us to the possible answer to the second question formulated at
the start of this article. Hybridity, and the distribution of agency and authorship are well
known concepts in practice and theory. However, in the current context of AI and its use
in artistic practice, these concepts gain particular relevance, as most artistic projects that
explore and work with AI are, in their own specific way, a demonstration of hybridity and
entanglement, and thus the distribution of agency between the human and the non-human.
Although most artists describe AI as a tool, artworks are staged as the emergent product
of co-creativity, collaboration and interplay, and this interplay is made perceptible in dif-
ferent ways depending on the artistic approach. In some works, such as those of Mario
Klingemann and Memo Akten, Isabella Salas, Helena Sarin, Robbie Barrat, the artistic duo
“The Entangled Others”, to name but a few, the very aesthetic and formal language refers
to the inclusion of the artificial, synthetic, algorithmic and, in this sense, non-human, and
reveals its signature. The artwork “Specious upwellings” by ‘Entagled Others’ (Entagled
Others 2022–2024) or the artwork “All Watched Over By Machines Of Loving Grace” by
Memo Akten (2021) could be seen as examples of this aesthetic. In the works of Refik
Anadol and Sougwen Chung, the reference to distribution of agency is made by the fact
that AI itself appears as a tangible co-producer and creative agent and acts performatively
in the work, whether as a visualization medium, as in the case of Refik Anadol (2022)’s
work “Unsupervised-Machine Hallucinations-MoMA”, or as a robotic arm, as in the case
of Sougwen Chung (2021)’s performative installation “Assembly Lines”. In the works of
the artist Pierre Huyghe, the distribution of agency is staged in a particularly impressive
way. He choreographs installations and hybrid arrangements in which the artwork comes
into being from the dynamic interaction of various agents, of which AI is only one of many.
Arts 2024 ,13, 152 10 of 12
The focus is therefore less on the final state of the artwork or the “artificial intelligence”,
but rather on the ongoing process of the artwork’s emergence and the ongoing process of
“artificial learning” (Tait 2024). Such a processual, hybrid arrangement is presented, for
example, in the video installation “Liminal” (2024), part of Pierre Huyghes’ solo exhibition
of the same name at the Venice Biennale (Huyghes 2024). “Liminal” (2024) is a monumental
simulation of a faceless, naked human body moving in response to real-time information
received from sensors embedded in the physical environment. The exhibition is also ac-
companied, among other works, by two human-machine hybrids called ‘idioms’, wearing
sleek golden masks that monitor the spaces they are in and the visitors they encounter; an
artificial intelligence gradually translates this information into a new language so that they
can communicate with each other.
As Scorzin (2023) notes, AI art wants to be understood as an expression of a new
co-creativity, cooperation and coexistence between artists and AI, between humans and
non-humans, and thus as a network phenomenon. Accordingly, by staging the complex
and distributed nature of agency and authorship, AI art refers to these well-known concepts
and discourses, while at the same time giving them renewed relevance in the public and
stimulating the discourse on co-creativity, coexistence and collaboration between humans
and machines in its new specific way.
6. Concluding Remarks
Finally, it can be concluded that AI art is practiced, but also staged and demonstrated,
in a way that claims to overcome not only the boundaries of one’s own artistic self, but
also the human anthropocentric perspective. Accordingly, AI art echoes a discourse that
began years ago in the face of the climate and Covid epidemic crises, moving away from a
purely anthropocentric view. Certainly, even before the rise of AI, non-human rhetoric has
saturated contemporary art discourse and practice, and many artistic productions in recent
years have focused on the post-anthropocentric topic. However, the rapid development of
AI technologies has not only forced the discourse of human and non-human collaboration,
co-creation, and the coexistence of human and machine, but has also provided art with a
medium that makes the network, hybridity, and distribution of agency tangible to both
artists and audiences like no other medium before it.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, M.D. and F.T.M.; methodology, M.D. and F.T.M.; valida-
tion, M.D. and F.T.M.; formal analysis, M.D. and F.T.M.; investigation, M.D. and F.T.M.; resources,
M.D. and F.T.M.; data curation, M.D. and F.T.M.; writing—original draft preparation, M.D. and F.T.M.;
writing—review and editing, M.D. and F.T.M.; supervision, M.D. and F.T.M.; project administration,
M.D. and F.T.M. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Data Availability Statement: No new data were created for this article.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
References
Abosch, Kevin. 2023. Will AI Replace Artists? Kevin Abosch at Central Saint Martins. Verse Journal . Available online: https://verse.works/
journal/will-ai-replace-artitst-kevin-abosch (accessed on 14 July 2024).
Akten, Memo. 2018. Machine Learning Art: An Interview with Memo Akten. Available online: https://www.artnome.com/news/20
18/12/13/machine-learning-art-an-interview-with-memo-akten (accessed on 14 July 2024).
Akten, Memo. 2021. All Watched Over by Machines of Loving Grace. Available online: https://www.memo.tv/works/all-watched-
over-by-machines-of-loving-grace/ (accessed on 2 September 2024).
Anadol, Refik. 2020. Wenn Maschinen träumen könnten. Monopol. Available online: https://www.monopol-magazin.de/refik-
anadol-baden-baden (accessed on 14 July 2024).
Anadol, Refik. 2022. Unsupervised-Machine Hallucinations-MoMA. Available online: https://refikanadol.com/works/unsupervised/
(accessed on 2 September 2024).
Berger, Christoph. 2012. Multiplikation und Diversifikation der Bilder und der Akteure in Edgar Degas’ künstlerischer Praxis.
Zeitschrift für Ästhetik und allgemeine Kunstwissenschaft 57: 90–103. [CrossRef]
Arts 2024 ,13, 152 11 of 12
Blank, Jens. 2024. KI-Kunst: Künstlertum—Schöpfung—Originalität. In Handbuch Künstliche Intelligenz und die Künste . Edited by
Sandra Catani. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, pp. 281–96. [CrossRef]
Bochner, Mel. 1997. Working Drawings and Other Visible Things on Paper Not Necessarily Meant to Be Viewed as Art . Cologne:
Walther König.
Callon, Michel. 1986. Some Elements of a Sociology of Translation: Domestication of the Scallops and the Fishermen of St. Brieuc Bay.
InPower, Action and Belief. A New Sociology of Knowledge? Edited by John Law. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, pp. 196–230.
Callon, Michel, and Bruno Latour. 1981. Unscrewing the Big Leviathan: How Actors Macro-Structure Reality and How Sociologists
Help Them to Do so? In Advances in Social Theory and Methodology. Toward an Integration of Micro- and Macro Sociologies . Edited by
Karin Knorr-Cetina and Aaron V . Cicourel. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, pp. 277–303.
Callon, Michel, and Bruno Latour. 1992. Don’t Throw the Baby out With the Bath School. A Reply to Collins and Yearley. In Science as
Practice and Culture . Edited by Andrew Pickering. Chicago: Chicago University Press, pp. 343–68. [CrossRef]
Chung, Sougwen. 2021. Assembly Lines. Available online: https://sougwen.com/project/assembly-lines-2022 (accessed on 2
September 2024).
Crespo, Sofia. 2023. MIT Media Lab (Lunch Series: Generative AI and Artistic Practice). Available online: https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=vAxLAgd76YM (accessed on 14 July 2024).
Elliott, Laura. 2022. AI Art: Between Technology and Art. In The Meaning of Creativity in the Age of AI . Edited by Raul Kelomees.
Kondapur: Eka, pp. 81–88.
Entagled Others. 2022–2024. Specious Upwellings. Available online: https://entangledothers.studio/specious-upwellings/ (accessed
on 2 September 2024).
Galanter, Philip. 2016. What is Generative Art? Complexity Theory as a Context for Art Theory. In A Companion to Digital Art . Edited
by Christiane Paul. Hoboken: Wiley & Sons, pp. 146–80.
Gibson, James J. 2014. The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception: Classic Edition . London: Psychology Press. First published 1979.
[CrossRef]
Goodfellow, Ian, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, and Yoshua Bengio. 2014. Generative
adversarial nets. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 27: 2672–80.
Hensel, Thomas, and Jens Schröter. 2012. Die Akteur-Netzwerk-Theorie als Herausforderung der Kunstwissenschaft. Zeitschrift für
Ästhetik und allgemeine Kunstwissenschaft 57: 5–18. [CrossRef]
Huyghes, Pierre. 2024. Liminal. Available online: https://www.pinaultcollection.com/palazzograssi/en/pierre-huyghe-liminal
(accessed on 2 September 2024).
Jameson, Fredric. 1991. Postmodernism, or, the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism . Durham: Duke University Press.
Klingemann, Mario. 2017. Teratoma. Available online: https://www.artsy.net/artwork/mario-klingemann-teratoma-series-11
(accessed on 2 September 2024).
Klingemann, Mario. 2019. Three Latent Body Problem. Available online: https://x.com/quasimondo/status/1083729580932976640
(accessed on 2 September 2024).
Klingemann, Mario. 2023. Mario Klingemann on ‘Teratoma’: An Exploration of AI and the Human Form. Verse Journal . Available
online: https://verse.works/journal/mario-klingeman (accessed on 14 July 2024).
Latour, Bruno. 2005. Reassembling the Social: An Introduction to Actor-Network-Theory . Oxford: Oxford University Press. [CrossRef]
Latour, Bruno. 2006. Über technische Vermittlung—Philosophie, Soziologie und Genealogie. In ANThology. Ein einführendes Handbuch
zur Akteur-Netzwerk-Theorie . Edited by Annemarie Belliger and David J. Krieger. Bielefeld: Transcript, pp. 483–528.
Law, John. 1986. On the Methods of Long-distance Control: Vessels, Navigation and the Portuguese Route to India. In Power, Action
and Belief. A New Sociology of Knowledge? Edited by John Law. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, pp. 234–63.
Law, John, and John Hassard. 1999. Actor Network Theory and after . Hoboken: Blackwell Publishing.
Lehmann, Ann-Sophie. 2012. Das Medium als Mediator Eine Materialtheorie für (Öl-) Bilder. Zeitschrift für Ästhetik und allgemeine
Kunstwissenschaft 57: 69–88. [CrossRef]
Lipski, Roman. 2024. Die Schönheit des Einsatzes von KI als künstlerisches Werkzeug liegt in der ständigen Überraschung, die sie
mit sich bringt. #AI_berlin. Available online: https://ai-berlin.com/de/blog/article/interview-mit-roman-lipski-ai-kuenstler
(accessed on 14 July 2024).
Mareis, Claudia, and Michael Rottmann. 2020. Entwerfen mit System. Eine Einführung. In Entwerfen mit System . Edited by Claudia
Mareis and Martina Rottmann. Hamburg: Adocs Verlag, pp. 5–24.
McCormick, Feileacan. 2022. Entangled Ways of Being—Interview with Feileacan McCormick and Sofia Crespo. Verse Journal . Available
online: https://verse.works/journal/entangled-ways-of-being (accessed on 14 July 2024).
Mersch, Dieter. 2019. Kreativität und Künstliche Intelligenz: Einige Bemerkungen zu einer Kritik algorithmischer Rationalität.
Zeitschrift für Medienwissenschaft 11: 65–74. [CrossRef]
Misselhorn, Catrin. 2023. Künstliche Intelligenz–das Ende der Kunst? Ditzingen: Reclam.
Morris, Robert. 2010. Einige Bemerkungen zur Phänomenologie des Machens. Die Suche nach dem Motivierten. In Robert Morris.
Bemerkungen zur Skulptur. Zwölf Texte . Edited by Sabine Titz and Christian Krümmel. Geneva: JRP Ringier Kunstverlag, pp. 75–95.
First published 1970.
Muscutt, Kirsty, and David Cope. 2007. Composing with Algorithms: An Interview with David Cope. Computer Music Journal
31: 10–22. [CrossRef]
Arts 2024 ,13, 152 12 of 12
Pickering, Andrew. 1995. The Mangle of Practice: Time, Agency, and Science . Chicago: University of Chicago Press. [CrossRef]
Pickering, Andrew. 2012. The robustness of science and the dance of agency. In Characterizing the Robustness of Science: After the
Practice Turn in Philosophy of Science . Edited by L éna Soler, Emiliano Trizio, Thomas Nickles and William C. Wimsatt. Berlin and
Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 317–27. [CrossRef]
Ploin, Annalise, Rebecca Eynon, Isis Hjorth, and Michael A. Osborne. 2022. AI and the Arts: How Machine Learning is Changing Artistic
Work. Report from the Creative Algorithmic Intelligence Research Project . Oxford: University of Oxford.
Rainisto, Roope. 2024. Twitter Space: Creative Control—Authorship & AI with Roope Rainisto. Verse Journal . Available online:
https://verse.works/journal/twitter-space-creative-control-authorship-ai-with-roope-rainisto (accessed on 14 July 2024).
Reckwitz, Andreas. 2012. Die Erfindung der Kreativität: Zum Prozess gesellschaftlicher Ästhetisierung . Berlin: Suhrkamp Verlag. [CrossRef]
Ridler, Anna. 2022. Anna Ridler: Working with GANs. How Can Art and Artificial Intelligence Interact? ART . Available online:
https://www.meer.com/en/68889-anna-ridler-working-with-gans (accessed on 14 July 2024).
Rottmann, Michael. 2023. Ästhetik der Automatisierung. Künstlerische Techniken des “von selbst” um 1920 und um 1960: Kontrolle—
Bewusstsein—Überraschung. In Kunst, Design und die “Technisierte Ästhetik” . Edited by Laura C. Grabbe, Christian Wagner and
Thomas Held. Marburg: Büchner-Verlag, pp. 123–43.
Rubio, Fernando Dom ínguez. 2012. The Material Production of the Spiral Jetty: A Study of Culture in the Making. Cultural Sociology
6: 143–61. [CrossRef]
Schröter, Jens. 2021. “Künstliche Intelligenz” und die Frage nach der künstlerischen Autor*innenschaft. Kunstforum International
278: 98–107.
Schürkmann, Carolin. 2018. Über das Sichtbare hinaus. Eine Soziologie künstlerischer Praxis. Zeitschrift für Soziologie 47: 438–53.
[CrossRef]
Scorzin, Pamela C. 2023. Kreativität, Kunst und KI. Zur algorithmisierten Ästhetik der AI ART. In Kunst, Design und die “Technisierte
Ästhetik” . Edited by Laura C. Grabbe, Christian Wagner and Thomas Held. Marburg: Büchner-Verlag, pp. 232–49.
Tait, Amelia. 2024. Artists’ AI Dilemma: Can Artificial Intelligence Make Intelligent Art? The Guardian . Available online: https://www.
theguardian.com/artanddesign/2024/apr/08/artists-ai-dilemma-can-artificial-intelligence-make-intelligent-art (accessed on 14
July 2024).
Yaneva, Albena. 2003a. Chalk Steps on the Museum Floor. Journal of Material Culture 8: 169–88. [CrossRef]
Yaneva, Albena. 2003b. When a Bus Met a Museum: To follow Artists, Curators, and Workers in Art Installation. Museum and Society
1: 116–31.
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
