https://doi.org/10.5325/jpoststud.8.1.0006
Journal of Posthuman Studies, Vol. 8, No. 1, 2024
Copyright © 2024 The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PAAUGUSTINE AND THE POSTHUMAN 
WRITER: TOWARD AN AMBIGUOUS 
AUTHORSHIP IN THE AGE OF  
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
TAMARA KAMATOVIĆ, CENTRAL EUROPEAN UNIVERSITY
ABSTRACT
/T_his article explores emerging hybrid ontologies of the posthuman in the context 
of generative AI technologies and their impact on writing practices. We should 
regard arguments mobilizing fear of AI-assisted or -generated writing as based on 
misguided anxieties about the potentials of human creative acts and man/machine 
hybrid creations (what this article refers to as a model of “weak authorship”). A 
reading of St. Augustine’s Confessions , a key work in the Judeo-Christian tradition, 
shows how an early Christian humanist text can give us a model for understanding 
paternalist structures that place human authorship and human creators within 
a hierarchy of creation, where the transcendental and divine is identiﬁed as the 
highest source of creation, and where the “human creator” must seek legitimation 
and authorization from that higher power to create in the ﬁrst place. /T_he article 
explores creativity through the concept of ambiguity , speculating on the extent 
to which AI and human authorship might be combined and to what extent such 
hybrid forms might impact our understanding of human creativity. As generative 
technologies continue to be integrated into our lifeworld, we should develop a 
strong account of authorship that embraces the concept of ambiguity as a means 
of orienting ourselves toward a nondualist ontology of becoming.
KEYWORDS
ambiguity, artiﬁcial intelligence, augustine, authorship, writing
/T_he emerging ﬁeld of aesthetics exploring the posthuman emphasizes that as 
we become less certain about what form the human will take in the future, we 
are also called on to adapt to new forms of ambiguity that cause us to reject 
02_Kamatovic.indd   602_Kamatovic.indd   6 12-12-2024   11:04:4812-12-2024   11:04:48Downloaded from http://scholarlypublishingcollective.org/psup/posthuman-studies/article-pdf/8/1/6/2180986/jpoststud.8.1.0006.pdf by PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIVERSITY user on 14 August 2025
This material may be protected by the Hong Kong Copyright Ordinance Cap.528. The copy is supplied for
private study or non-commercial use only. It is not for publication or further reproduction.
AUGUSTINE AND THE POSTHUMAN WRITER  | /seven.lf
dualism and embrace new forms of plurality (Sorgner ). Digitization 
in our lifeworld and in the ﬁeld of creative production forces us to confront 
emerging forms of technology in order to address the ambiguities of new hybrid 
tech/human creations. Posthumanist aesthetics builds both on twentieth-  
century postmodernist ontology and on aesthetics, which sought to overcome 
conventional dualistic distinctions by removing “the artist” and “the author” 
from their creative product and replacing the category of “artwork” with more 
ﬂuid categories such as “happening,” “experimentation,” or “event” (Lyotard 
(). In addition to making ontological arguments about the relationship of 
a “creator” to an artistic or creative product, postmodernists and posthumanists 
also examine the way in which knowledge and artworks are controlled and 
regulated within the sociopolitical domain. Both traditional postmodernists 
and scholars of posthumanism prefer collective to individualist-oriented or 
“creator-centered” models of creation, refusing hierarchical relations of own -
ership and possession.
Postmodernists place a speciﬁc value on understanding how creative prod -
ucts can be catalogued in the general “order of things” so that they can be 
made intelligible for both scientiﬁc knowledge and philosophical reﬂection 
(Foucault , ).( Generative AI technologies represent a turning point in 
human–technological orientation. No longer merely tools understood through 
the Promethean model, these technologies, which generate and “produce,” pose 
challenges to our capacity to control and catalogue artistic representations. 
For some, this poses a threat to the human capacity to create from needs and 
desires that are speciﬁcally structured around human experience, such as lack, 
shame, or drives that are psychically and libidinally constituted. Both Freud and 
Nietzsche, for example, saw in the act of creation a drive linked to the need to 
“sublimate” or “overcome” either unconscious drives or the state of being all too 
human—a feature of experience denied to neural networks (Freud ). For 
Nietzsche, this was part of redirecting libidinal drives into creative ones, ﬁnding 
perhaps its most apposite expression in the aphorism that to make “music is 
another way of making children” (Nietzsche , ([)], KSA .). For 
posthumanists, however, embracing these new technologies as co-producers 
of knowledge does not necessarily mean denying the human experience, nor 
arguing for the “superiority” of AI over carriers of human genomes. Instead, 
scholarship focused on the relationship between generative AI and creativity 
attempts to revisit anthropocentric models based both in “physical” and “sym -
bolic” violence in order to determine the future outlines of the “human” and 
to challenge structures of paternalism (Kalpokiene and Kalpokas, ).
Predicting the upheaval that dispersive technologies like generative AI would 
bring about in the organization of society, the philosopher–psychoanalyst duo 
Deleuze and Guattari draw a distinction between what they call “primitive 
02_Kamatovic.indd   702_Kamatovic.indd   7 12-12-2024   11:04:4812-12-2024   11:04:48Downloaded from http://scholarlypublishingcollective.org/psup/posthuman-studies/article-pdf/8/1/6/2180986/jpoststud.8.1.0006.pdf by PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIVERSITY user on 14 August 2025
This material may be protected by the Hong Kong Copyright Ordinance Cap.528. The copy is supplied for
private study or non-commercial use only. It is not for publication or further reproduction.
/eight.lf | TAMARA KAMATOVIĆ
machines,” which they characterize as instruments organizing organic produc -
tion ﬂows according to the logic of “segmentation” that preserves genealogical 
hierarchies (entitlements, titles, privileges, etc.) and what they call machines of 
“dispersion,” which ﬂow “on a blind, mute, deterritorialized socius”(Deleuze 
and Guattari )), ). /T_hey argue that this “decoded ﬂow,” like the “black 
box” of generative technologies, will trigger a primitive fear of incest—a fear 
of unfamiliar parentage that cannot be classiﬁed, organized, or understood 
(Deleuze and Guattari )), ).
For decades, anti-technology activists have used these “primitive” anxieties 
around emerging technologies to marshal consensus around their curbing.) A 
recent example of how such activism is applied to generative AI shows that this 
fearmongering often comes from the very top of state and academic hierar -
chies. In an opinion column written by the late Henry Kissinger, together with 
experts in technology and science, the former US Secretary of State expressed 
apprehensions about the “cumulative ambiguities” brought about by generative 
artiﬁcial intelligence, suggesting that this technology might usher in a counter-  
Enlightenment, if not a dark age (Kissinger, Schmidt, and Huttenlocher ).
I argue that embracing these untraceable “monsters” of ambiguity may o,er 
a path to overcoming limitations on human creative potential, not a backslid -
ing into barbarism, and that we should not fear an age in which generative AI 
competes with our talents or challenges our ability to think and write. I base my 
argument, on one hand, on generative AI technology’s ability to release us from 
coercive binaries found in the institutions regulating our knowledge (what can be 
called the question of “open access”) and the ﬂawed weak historical ontological 
position toward human creation itself. My analysis focuses speciﬁcally on the 
institution of “authorship” as an institution touching on both these ontological 
and open-access-related topics. I show that authorship serves as an ontological 
orientation, deriving its position on creation from theological proscriptions about 
the legitimacy of divine creation, and I suggest that ownership, possession, and 
circulation of creative works was condensed into the idea of authorial creation. 
My reading does not seek to uphold the value  of GenAI creation over human 
creation, nor do I mean to ignore the speciﬁcity of human creativity as a means 
either of compensating for human deﬁciencies or of “overcoming” in favor of 
smoother, easier, and more e-cient machines. Instead, I wish to show that, in 
a future where generative AI cannot be avoided and will increasingly be used 
by artists, we must support means of understanding hybrid creations in a more 
creative  way, without ignoring or dismissing the relevance of speciﬁc human 
psycho-libidinal structures or, as one of the leading ﬁgures in the posthuman 
movement, Stefan Lorenz Sorgner, calls them, “psychophysiological drives” 
(Sorgner , ().
02_Kamatovic.indd   802_Kamatovic.indd   8 12-12-2024   11:04:4812-12-2024   11:04:48Downloaded from http://scholarlypublishingcollective.org/psup/posthuman-studies/article-pdf/8/1/6/2180986/jpoststud.8.1.0006.pdf by PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIVERSITY user on 14 August 2025
This material may be protected by the Hong Kong Copyright Ordinance Cap.528. The copy is supplied for
private study or non-commercial use only. It is not for publication or further reproduction.
AUGUSTINE AND THE POSTHUMAN WRITER  | /nine.lf
/T_hrough a close reading of St. Augustine’s Confessions , a Christian humanist 
work, this article reveals how notions of an artwork’s “legitimacy” are rooted in 
inherited beliefs based in paternalistic structures with normative implications 
(Sorgner ). Despite the secular Renaissance and Enlightenment’s challenging 
of this speciﬁc Christian humanist paradigm of authorship, I argue that the 
dualistic relations undergirding this notion persisted in institutions regulating 
the economic exchange of artworks. I conclude by proposing a new aesthetic 
paradigm for engaging with authorship in the age of AI, which opposes dualist 
ontologies and recommends an understanding of writing as an ambiguous prac -
tice in which the integration of emerging technologies into writing and creative 
practices can promote self-enhancement and experimentation with new forms.
TEXTOLATRY AND THE POSITION OF THE AUTHOR IN LITERARY STUDIES
For most of the twentieth century, the role of the author was not considered 
signiﬁcant, as “authorship” could not be rigorously applied to the study of ideas, 
cultural phenomena, or the formal aspects of literary language. As a result, the 
recent historical study of literature could be described as a practice of “textolatry.” 
/T_his approach prioritizes the “centrality of text” over the “romantic centrality 
of the artist” (Pavel , ). One reason for this excision of the author from 
literary study owed to the ambiguity of ﬁctional creations and their unintel -
ligibility for science. In his study of the semantics of ﬁction, the literary critic 
and author /T_homas Pavel surveys the impact of scientistic-based approaches 
on literary theory and critiques the dominance of structuralism in literary the -
ory, which had an outsized inﬂuence on the education and training of literary 
scholars in the West. /T_hat tradition, which rejected ambiguity in all its forms, 
was preceded by the analytical school of philosophy’s pursuit of clariﬁcation of 
philosophical language, with its mission of eliminating ambiguous statements. 
With the emergence of structuralism, the concept of “mythocentrism,” which 
sought universal properties of language through phonological models, privileged 
abstract narrative functions to the extent that they could be universalized. Both 
the analytical philosophical and structuralist schools were eventually supplanted 
by the transformational generative approach, which examined literature through 
a lens that enabled the study of issues such as “literary truth,” the “nature of 
ﬁction,” and the “resemblance between literature and reality,” aspects neglected 
by the logical positivist and structuralist schools (Pavel , ). For this new 
school of literary thought, the act of human creativity needed to be understood 
in the vocabulary of the “imagination”—the drives and a,ects constituting the 
02_Kamatovic.indd   902_Kamatovic.indd   9 12-12-2024   11:04:4812-12-2024   11:04:48Downloaded from http://scholarlypublishingcollective.org/psup/posthuman-studies/article-pdf/8/1/6/2180986/jpoststud.8.1.0006.pdf by PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIVERSITY user on 14 August 2025
This material may be protected by the Hong Kong Copyright Ordinance Cap.528. The copy is supplied for
private study or non-commercial use only. It is not for publication or further reproduction.
/one.lf/zero.lf | TAMARA KAMATOVIĆ
speciﬁc capacity and need of the human to create—not in terms of “building 
blocks” that could be understood through the cipher of language.
In addition to these language-based scientiﬁc models, schools such as the 
Frankfurt School analyzed literature in connection with dialectical historical 
materialism. For these scholars, authorship was associated with bourgeois 
notions of “human dignity” and “freedom” that emerged in art during the 
nineteenth century (Adorno , ). /T_he incorporation of subjectivity or 
authorial voice into artwork reﬂected bourgeois art forms, such as the novel, 
and was directly tied to the emergence of a self-conscious bourgeois class that 
would eventually be supplanted by more revolutionary forms of social orga -
nization. /T_his, at least, was a hope articulated by critics such as the Marxist 
scholar György Lukács, who saw the eventual redemption of literature in the 
birth of the rise of the working class. A new world, Lukacs hoped, would usher 
in a new literary form, the “renewed epic,” to supplant ﬂawed bourgeois forms 
(Lukács (, ). /T_he temptation to turn this anti-author textolatry into 
a utopia was strong for many reasons. Structuralists such as Roland Barthes 
were particularly optimistic about the end of the domination of authorship on 
literary practice (Barthes and Heath , (). Referring to the achievements 
of literary modernism represented by outstanding ﬁgures such as Mallarmé and 
Proust, Barthes aimed to show that the authorless future would be a future in 
which language could unfold in all its combinatory and splendid possibilities, 
independent of subjective human imprint.
Although this anti-author approach has remained inﬂuential and “author” 
is not applied rigorously as a category in the interpretation of works, the sig -
niﬁcance of “authorship” and its relevance has not gone away with the birth 
and development of critical literary studies. /T_his is patently obvious in the 
publishing world, where books sell because of the personalities of their authors. 
/T_he recent cases of Jeanine Cummins and Elena Ferrante show that the “author” 
has gained in importance as identity politics forces questions of “authenticity” 
into mainstream literary reception. It is also true, however, in literary studies, 
where ﬁgures such as Goethe, Shakespeare, Byron, and Cervantes continue to 
organize the transmission of knowledge in course lectures and seminars and 
serve as central reference points for canonical transmission.(
Formalist, language-based schools were able to advocate interpretive styles 
that focused on language and its correspondence either to truth or to universal 
properties. Yet they failed to extirpate the author as a normative practice, nor 
did they get to the real “heart” of what the ontology of the author was. For 
scholars such as Barthes or Lukács, the author was a historical phenomenon 
to be overtaken by new—and more revolutionary—social conﬁgurations. 
Once the nineteenth century and its visions of Romantic genius had receded, 
02_Kamatovic.indd   1002_Kamatovic.indd   10 12-12-2024   11:04:4812-12-2024   11:04:48Downloaded from http://scholarlypublishingcollective.org/psup/posthuman-studies/article-pdf/8/1/6/2180986/jpoststud.8.1.0006.pdf by PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIVERSITY user on 14 August 2025
This material may be protected by the Hong Kong Copyright Ordinance Cap.528. The copy is supplied for
private study or non-commercial use only. It is not for publication or further reproduction.
AUGUSTINE AND THE POSTHUMAN WRITER  | /one.lf/one.lf
they believed we would be rid of the disease of bourgeois individualism that 
attended forms of subjective intrusion, such as strong claims on authorship. In 
the following close reading of Augustine’s Confessions , I show that the speciﬁc 
ontology of authorship is circumscribed by a far older binary than the nineteenth 
century, with its roots in Christian humanism. /T_his may go a little way toward 
explaining why authorship continues to organize the way that we think about 
the relationship between intellectual or creative property.
THE ONTOLOGY OF AUTHORSHIP AND DIVINE CREATION: ST. AUGUSTINE’S 
CONFESSIONS
/T_he Confessions  ()–( AD) represent a signiﬁcant contribution to the 
Judeo-Christian tradition for many reasons, not least for their vivid narration 
of Augustine’s life, including the famous recounting of his vast carnal appetites 
as well as his reﬂections on Christianity, competing religions, and conversion. 
/T_hey also contain many insights into the signiﬁcance of human creation and 
the connection between learning and creating. /T_his analysis will also show how 
the work conceives of the relationship between creation, human autonomy, 
and authorship. /T_his is explicitly thematized in the work through Augustine’s 
insecurities surrounding his right to author the story of his life and his concern 
with how writing might interfere with God’s jurisdiction over him and his soul.
A crucial question posed throughout the Confessions  is whether Augustine 
can make a claim to author his text at all. He treats and resolves this question 
through a dialectical analysis—rendered poetically in the work’s framing dia -
logue with God—on the limits placed on human creation by man’s insu-cient 
capacities on one hand and by the human tendency to go “mad” through cre -
ation that happens without authorization or consent from God on the other. 
In this account, all human beings must accept their position as mediators of 
God’s sovereignty in creation. He is, furthermore, the only entity that can create 
perfection: “You gather all things to yourself though you su,er no need. You 
support, you ﬁll, and you protect all things. You create them, nourish them, 
and bring them to perfection” (Augustinus , ). Humans, by contrast, can 
only create after seeking consent from God.
/T_hus, before beginning his diegetic act, Augustine must ﬁrst obtain con -
sent from God, or ask for permission to both create and authorize his writing: 
“Help me to ﬁnd words to explain” (Augustinus , ). Augustine is careful 
to highlight man’s relative vulnerability and insu-ciency before asking for this 
consent, since he cannot concede a position in which humans possess any form 
of “creative capacity” over which God has no jurisdiction or for which God is 
not responsible: “My soul is like a house, small for you to enter, but I pray you 
02_Kamatovic.indd   1102_Kamatovic.indd   11 12-12-2024   11:04:4812-12-2024   11:04:48Downloaded from http://scholarlypublishingcollective.org/psup/posthuman-studies/article-pdf/8/1/6/2180986/jpoststud.8.1.0006.pdf by PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIVERSITY user on 14 August 2025
This material may be protected by the Hong Kong Copyright Ordinance Cap.528. The copy is supplied for
private study or non-commercial use only. It is not for publication or further reproduction.
/one.lf/two.lf | TAMARA KAMATOVIĆ
to enlarge it” (Augustinus , ). In this way, the act of authoring a text, or 
the act of telling the story of his life, ﬂows from a hierarchy in which di,erent 
entities have di,erent determined capacities. God is the most gifted creator, 
since He is the most “gifted with speech” (Augustinus , ). Notwithstanding 
this relative insu-ciency of man compared with this God, Augustine ﬁnds it 
possible to begin writing his text insofar as he accepts his position as a vessel of 
God, or as subordinate within the greater hierarchy of creativity.
If the human is only one of many creations of God and all capacity to create 
given to humans is granted by God, then it also follows that it is only through 
God’s will that man can create. In this way, consent and authorization become 
connected to creative capacities. To demonstrate a capacity to create means, 
accordingly, to accept authorization from a higher power. Augustine renounces 
any claim to a human capacity in which God plays no role. He asks for God to ﬁll 
him with his speech so that he can write: “Help me to ﬁnd words to explain .  . .  
My heart has ears ready to listen to you, Lord. Open them wide and whisper 
in my heart” (Augustinus , (–). To ask for this consent to author his 
text means to appeal to God’s forgiveness for man’s innate weaknesses and 
vulnerabilities: “But dust and ashes though I am, let me appeal to your pity, 
since it is to you in your mercy that I speak, not to a man, who would simply 
laugh at me. Perhaps you too may laugh at me, but you will relent and have 
pity on me” (Augustinus , (–).
Education and learning play a crucial role in Augustine’s recounting of 
his conversion and in underlining the di,erences between di,erent forms of 
learning and mastering toward the act of creation. /T_he illustration of chapters 
from his later life, particularly the recounts of his sexual exploits, ﬂow from 
his experiences as an adolescent and the knowledge and experience that he 
obtained under the schoolmasters (and their canes). Augustine is particularly 
committed to showing how schooling and education represent a form of false 
authority and that learning without the authority or law of God leads only to 
“noxious pleasures which cause us to desert [God]” (Augustinus , (). His 
account of how he came to learn language serves to justify this warning. For 
Augustine, language and learning are linked to the temptation that arises from 
man’s desire to seek autonomy:
All the same I was compelled to learn and good came to me as a 
result, although it was not of my own making. For I would not have 
studied at all if I had not been obliged to do so, and what a person 
does against his will is not to his own credit, even if what he does is 
good in itself. Nor was the good which came of it due to those who 
compelled me to study, but to you, my God. For they had not the 
02_Kamatovic.indd   1202_Kamatovic.indd   12 12-12-2024   11:04:4812-12-2024   11:04:48Downloaded from http://scholarlypublishingcollective.org/psup/posthuman-studies/article-pdf/8/1/6/2180986/jpoststud.8.1.0006.pdf by PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIVERSITY user on 14 August 2025
This material may be protected by the Hong Kong Copyright Ordinance Cap.528. The copy is supplied for
private study or non-commercial use only. It is not for publication or further reproduction.
AUGUSTINE AND THE POSTHUMAN WRITER  | /one.lf/three.lf
insight to see that I might put the lessons which they forced me to 
learn to any other purpose than the satisfaction of man’s insatiable 
desire for the poverty he calls wealth and the infamy he knows as fame. 
(Augustinus , –)
Similarly, Augustine’s account defends the notion that the acquisition of 
reason through language is based, ﬁrst and foremost, on acceptance of God’s 
universal language. With this understanding of language, Augustine further 
entrenches his role as author as that of a “mediator” or “vessel” instead of a 
“creator.” Augustine defends this position by explaining that the learning of 
language does not happen through communication of symbols or words, or 
learning within the family or at school, but rather through grasping the full 
spectrum of language’s natural characteristics, which make up God-given creation:
I can remember that time, and later on I realized how I had learnt 
to speak. It was not my elders who showed me the words by some 
set system of instruction, in the way that they taught me to read not 
long afterwards; but, instead, I taught myself by using the intelligence 
which you, my God, gave to me. . . . for there is a kind of universal 
language, consisting of expressions of the face and eyes, gestures and 
tones of voice, which can show whether a person means to ask for 
something and get it, or refuse it and having nothing to do with it. 
(Augustinus , )
/T_his allows Augustine to make a hierarchical distinction between what might 
be deﬁned as a quasi-phonetic or naturalistic conception of language and a 
morphemic one. /T_he second deﬁnes language as the acquisition of the word 
and is linked to rationality, while the ﬁrst is based in the divine gift of God’s 
creation (in the phenomena making up the natural features of speech). In 
Augustine’s account, morphemic systems are secondary to naturalistic and 
phonetic ones. By extension, rationality, as secondary in the process of language 
acquisition, is also God-given. Indeed, rationality as a God-given gift has long 
been adduced as evidence and justiﬁcation for human-centered ontologies in 
which God gives authorization to man to master and tamper with the world. 
/T_his further supports laws in which the acquisition of God-granted rationality 
regulates the adjudication of rights.
Having language as a God-given gift and learning to speak words or write 
are, by extension, not synonymous processes. /T_he applies also to the distinction 
conventionally made between speaking and writing, which was a strong motif 
in ancient philosophy, as in Plato’s dialogues in the Phaedrus . For ancient phi -
losophers, writing was a form of technological (or Promethean) enhancement. 
02_Kamatovic.indd   1302_Kamatovic.indd   13 12-12-2024   11:04:4812-12-2024   11:04:48Downloaded from http://scholarlypublishingcollective.org/psup/posthuman-studies/article-pdf/8/1/6/2180986/jpoststud.8.1.0006.pdf by PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIVERSITY user on 14 August 2025
This material may be protected by the Hong Kong Copyright Ordinance Cap.528. The copy is supplied for
private study or non-commercial use only. It is not for publication or further reproduction.
/one.lf/four.lf | TAMARA KAMATOVIĆ
For Augustine, the “human-centered” aspect occurs in the learning of words. 
Acquisition of language consists in two steps—ﬁrst learning through one’s own 
inherent ability to interpret God’s sounds as universal language and then learn -
ing to produce words—and thus writing is a further extension of a logos-based 
language taught primarily by teachers in schools. To the extent that logos is not 
understood as a secondary, but as a primary process that reﬂects man’s inherent 
and autonomous capacities, it represents a signiﬁcant threat to God’s creation 
and endangers a proper understanding of the human as a “vessel” or weaker 
actor in the hierarchy of creation.
Writing or creating represents a dangerous potential to bypass God’s autho -
rizing consent and go mad. “Madness” here must be understood not only as 
a form of delusions of grandeur, but also as a way of distinguishing between 
“real” and “false” knowledge in writing without the consent or authorization 
of God. Augustine refuses to endorse a comparison between human and 
divine creation, but rather accepts a hierarchy where “rationality” derives from 
logos-based speech and should properly lead to a closer connection with God, 
or to the virtue of accepting His word. Augustine describes what he means 
by “madness” and epitomizes the misguided ancient notion of creativity that 
compares the human with the divine in his recounting of reading the Homeric 
epics and Virgil’s Aeneid as an adolescent. Both, to him, were pleasurable to read 
and represented diversions from “valuable studies” that taught him to read and 
write through rote memorization. Yet they both are described as mere “fancies 
dreamed up by poets” and “empty romances” without the authorization of God. 
/T_hus, even though “the burning of T roy and .  . . the ghost of Creusa” were 
“enchanting dreams,” they were inferior to the “loathsome jingles” learned in 
school to master timetables or arithmetic (Augustinus , (–). Learning for 
the sake of being a vessel or a tool has as its goal the promulgation of God’s will 
and can thus be said to be within the boundaries of man’s authority to create. 
/T_his learning is based in “practicality” that gives the power to “read whatever 
is set before me and write whatever I wish to write” (Augustinus , ). 
However, romances with the goal of upholding man’s ability to create without 
any due recognition of God or without the authorization of divine consent are 
mere fantasies, representing delusions and falsehood.
Even where Augustine concedes that the capacity that brings about such 
dreams and empty romances can be described as the product of human creativ -
ity or invention, he takes pains to clarify that such acts are done with ulterior 
motives. In the example of Homer and the human weaknesses attributed to 
the Greek gods, Augustine points out that Homer may have invented these 
tales and stories but would have only done so to justify human sinfulness. 
/T_hus, the Homeric works—which endorse criminal acts—lose their authority 
02_Kamatovic.indd   1402_Kamatovic.indd   14 12-12-2024   11:04:4812-12-2024   11:04:48Downloaded from http://scholarlypublishingcollective.org/psup/posthuman-studies/article-pdf/8/1/6/2180986/jpoststud.8.1.0006.pdf by PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIVERSITY user on 14 August 2025
This material may be protected by the Hong Kong Copyright Ordinance Cap.528. The copy is supplied for
private study or non-commercial use only. It is not for publication or further reproduction.
AUGUSTINE AND THE POSTHUMAN WRITER  | /one.lf/five.lf
as texts, as they cannot be the basis of any normative law or have a claim as to 
authority as a text.
/T_he ﬁnal step that is important in Augustine’s hierarchy of distinctions 
between legitimate and illegitimate forms of creation is the relationship between 
creation and procreation. To further highlight the sinfulness of creation without 
God’s consent, Augustine makes an astonishing comparison between schools 
and brothels, thereby further entrenching the notion of “legitimate” and “ille -
gitimate” forms of creating through comparison to sexual acts occurring inside 
marriage and the procreative begetting done merely for the sake of pleasure: 
“It is true that curtains are hung over the entrances to the schools where liter -
ature is taught, but they are not so much symbols in honor of mystery as veils 
concealing error” (Augustinus , (). /T_he meaning of these veils becomes 
clear through the following statement: “/T_he words are certainly not learnt 
any the more easily by reason of the ﬁlthy moral, but ﬁlth is committed with 
greater conﬁdence as a result of learning the words”(Augustinus , )). /T_he 
teachers, themselves, were misguided in their learning, for though the “words,” 
that is, “reason” and “human autonomy,” were not in and of themselves ﬁlthy, 
it was the ends to which they were put into service that deluded and corrupted 
Augustine in his youth.
/T_hese reﬂections on authorship make it possible to consider writing in rela -
tion to what one might call a weak  ontology of authorship. /T_his weak ontology 
presupposes not only a single creator, but also a legitimizing structure built on 
dualist foundations with the goal of obtaining higher consent. Authorship and 
writing practices have, for a very long time, related to normativity deriving from 
divine consent and established by the legitimizing example of a “perfect creator.” 
In e,ect, Augustine delegates to the writer the task of the “work” of writing, 
while reserving the cream of that creation for another—a position on creation 
that runs exactly against the “Romantic genius” endorsed by the structuralists 
in their criticism of authorship.
Augustine’s work suggests that a weak ontology of authorship is tied up with 
what it means to create as an imperfect being in relation to a perfect one . According 
to this model, to be human is to accept that human creation is subordinate to 
other greater beings. /T_he material proof of this ontology is copyright, which 
has been given di,erent names throughout the history of print but was once 
signiﬁcantly called a “grace” bestowed on a lesser creator by a higher executive 
power. /T_he printing of the book then is the concession of “privileges” to an 
author, enacted by a higher authority. /T_his weak view of authorship, which 
runs counter to the atheistic Renaissance or Romantic view of authorship 
that saw creation as a means of self-liberation from dogma—Goethe’s Faust is 
tragically unable to do this, but Shelley’s Prometheus succeeds—saw human 
02_Kamatovic.indd   1502_Kamatovic.indd   15 12-12-2024   11:04:4812-12-2024   11:04:48Downloaded from http://scholarlypublishingcollective.org/psup/posthuman-studies/article-pdf/8/1/6/2180986/jpoststud.8.1.0006.pdf by PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIVERSITY user on 14 August 2025
This material may be protected by the Hong Kong Copyright Ordinance Cap.528. The copy is supplied for
private study or non-commercial use only. It is not for publication or further reproduction.
/one.lf/six.lf | TAMARA KAMATOVIĆ
creative propensities as a weakness in and of themselves, not a strength. It is 
important to note this distinction, given the bias of literary criticism toward 
the Romantic model of authorship, as described in the next section.
NON-DUALISM, AI, AND AUTHORSHIP: TOWARD A STRONG ACCOUNT  
OF WRITING AND AUTHORSHIP
“Ambiguous,” from “ ambi ” (both) and “ agere” (to steer), means to “steer both 
ways”: not to decide on one path or lay claim to one truth, but to remain 
open to many possible futures of creating and being. Embracing an ontology 
of becoming means embracing ambiguous forms—Haraway’s cyborgs, the 
monsters and hybrids of posthuman artworks—or remaining open to the pos -
sibilities of writing futures (Haraway ). An ontology of becoming rejects 
the notion that there is “one truth” in the non-empirical world, and instead 
takes seriously ambiguous and evolving forms of life, including the emergence 
and development of new technologies. Although the evolution of literary the -
ory shows that there is no “truth” in ﬁction or writing, only correspondences, 
semantics, and generative possibilities, the search for unambiguous language 
and truth was, as described in the second section of this article, the grounds 
for exorcising the author—as a subjective and statistically unrepresentable “free 
radical”—from formal literary criticism.
Studies on the mainstream chatbot ChatGPT so far have concluded that its 
abilities are limited in comparison to human writing—that its rule-based thinking 
curtails its ability to be inventive in terms of style, and that its propensity to 
take on “impersonal it positions” and not “I-positions” marks it as substantially 
di,erent from the idiosyncrasies of personalized human writing (Matusov  
et al. ). Several experimental studies with chatbots that have designed tasks 
for Bing or ChatGPT, such as the “grandomastry” activities based in random 
educational design, conclude that AI is proﬁcient at “storytelling,” noting an 
ability to tell stories that are “captivating” (Popov Alexander ). /T_his view -
point is marginal and the number of these empirical studies is limited, but there 
is a strong consensus on chatbot and generative AI use and its instrumental 
value, that is, its capacity to assist in writing, perform editing tasks, assist with 
organization, and proofread (Altmäe, Sola-Leyva, and Salumets ).
ChatGPT’s capacity to generate human-like text has also been signiﬁcantly 
noted, including by Kissinger et al. By this they refer to the chatbot’s ability to 
“produce unique responses,” that is, select information from a human-generated 
data set on the basis of probabilistic thinking, which constitutes a unique response 
in accordance with the principles of deeper syntactic structures (Chomsky ).
02_Kamatovic.indd   1602_Kamatovic.indd   16 12-12-2024   11:04:4812-12-2024   11:04:48Downloaded from http://scholarlypublishingcollective.org/psup/posthuman-studies/article-pdf/8/1/6/2180986/jpoststud.8.1.0006.pdf by PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIVERSITY user on 14 August 2025
This material may be protected by the Hong Kong Copyright Ordinance Cap.528. The copy is supplied for
private study or non-commercial use only. It is not for publication or further reproduction.
AUGUSTINE AND THE POSTHUMAN WRITER  | /one.lf/seven.lf
However, what has also emerged as a consensus point is that the devel -
opment of AI generative technologies may yet surprise us, as the mind and 
engine of these machines “lie under the hood,” with even their inventors 
unable to predict their future capacities. Given that there are many critics of 
the “black box” theory of ChatGPT, we need not make any predictions about 
the immediate future of such technologies, but may rather accept their existence 
and accept that they will be integrated into future artworks. Large language 
models, such as ChatGPT, have pushed the needle on public opinion about 
what it means to work and live with generative AI, with many Americans 
now agreeing that AI can be classiﬁed as sentient. /T_here is a direct correlation 
between this perception and support for blanket bans on its use (Pauketat, 
Ladak, and Anthis ). In terms of this article, this would suggest that as the 
perception of AI’s ability to author and produce original and authentic works 
increases (a strong ontology of authorship), it becomes more threatening (a 
weak ontology of authorship).
My argument emphasizes that as AI becomes mores sentient or more rec -
ognized as such, the threat of its ability to “author” original texts in the strong 
sense of creation becomes more of a possibility. /T_he “weak” ontological position 
of authorship supported by the Christian humanist tradition and modeled by 
Augustine shows what is at stake here. /T_he machine’s ability to generate and 
author cannot be contained, sourced, understood, or regulated. For this reason, 
there is a correlation between the increasing perception of its sentience and the 
urge to ban its use.
For a perspective that embraces the ambiguities of an ontology of becom -
ing, such outright bans are implausible and a weak ontology of authorship 
is impractical in an age of information ﬂow and new restructuring of the 
archeology of human sciences (Foucault ). What must, instead, be stressed 
is the way in which such technologies can be used both instrumentally and 
perhaps (eventually) creatively. For college students writing term papers and 
seminar papers and confronted with the task of thinking as it evolves via 
writing, the use of ChatGPT must not be “banned,” but should rather be 
moderated and guided. In educational contexts, for example, it is possible to 
admit certain uses of generative technologies to teach students about their use 
and engage with their own writing styles more reﬂectively. Most intentional 
pedagogies stress this approach to writing, accepting that these technologies 
not only not will go away, but will continue to develop in unexpected ways 
(Ng et al. ).
Although it seems remote, if, in the future, AI generative tools can write an 
original and inventive work such as  In Search of Lost Time , then the authorship 
of such a work ought to be celebrated, just as the authorship of Marcel Proust’s 
02_Kamatovic.indd   1702_Kamatovic.indd   17 12-12-2024   11:04:4812-12-2024   11:04:48Downloaded from http://scholarlypublishingcollective.org/psup/posthuman-studies/article-pdf/8/1/6/2180986/jpoststud.8.1.0006.pdf by PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIVERSITY user on 14 August 2025
This material may be protected by the Hong Kong Copyright Ordinance Cap.528. The copy is supplied for
private study or non-commercial use only. It is not for publication or further reproduction.
/one.lf/eight.lf | TAMARA KAMATOVIĆ
work is recognized as an achievement. Such works may also take the shape of 
hybrid realizations. Once paternalistic structures of legitimizing consent are 
denied, there seems to be no plausibly good reason to deny a future in which 
such cultural products could be realized, whether by carbon-based lifeforms or 
neural networks. Future uses of AI in writing, as the technology develops, must 
not prohibit nor deny the possibility of co-authorship, when possible. /T_hrough 
AI, we can learn also what it means to have a strong account of authorship, 
that is, to embrace the ambiguity of language and the subjectivity of writing 
by new forms of cognition, where we may not be able to understand or cannot 
predict how it will create. What is required here is not a forensic analysis of 
what is or is not human, but rather that we ask the right questions: For what 
and for whom do we create and why? If large language models are part of our 
lifeworld, they will be part of that equation.
CONCLUSIONS
Studies of large language models such as Chat GPT and generative AI have 
focused on the ability of AI to create texts that are “humanlike” and have thus 
considered the problem of sentience in relation to the powers of creativity. /T_his 
article examines this problem as both a historical and a philosophical problem. 
To answer the philosophical problem of AI bans fully and consider it critically, 
we need to ﬁnd many rich examples of what it means to author a text and to 
consider di,erent ontologies of authorship. Such examples touch on interrelated 
topics discussed brieﬂy in this article, such as the relationship between truth, 
ﬁction, and subjective human imprints on writing and the historical question of 
open access, or the way in which knowledge is circulated within the archeology 
of the human sciences (Foucault ).
/T_his article analyzes a speciﬁc “weak” ontology of authorship to assess the 
constraints that limit human creativity outside of the powers of human cogni -
tion and capacity for artistic representation. St. Augustine’s moving—and, for 
us, remote—autobiographical narrative discourse may not seem like a natural 
interlocutor for chatbots, but this article has shown that its reﬂections on the 
meaning of creation warn us about the dangers of imposing metaphysical barriers 
on creation. Augustine’s writing was a philosophical acceptance of subjugating 
creativity to an otherworldly, better, truer form of divine creation. /T_hat meta -
physical position was part of a discursive logic that was historically inscribed into 
institutions of copyright that control, regulate, source, and authenticate human 
creativity and discourse. /T_hus, his perspective clariﬁes how bans on creativity 
might reinforce a dualistic ontology that is becoming even more implausible 
02_Kamatovic.indd   1802_Kamatovic.indd   18 12-12-2024   11:04:4812-12-2024   11:04:48Downloaded from http://scholarlypublishingcollective.org/psup/posthuman-studies/article-pdf/8/1/6/2180986/jpoststud.8.1.0006.pdf by PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIVERSITY user on 14 August 2025
This material may be protected by the Hong Kong Copyright Ordinance Cap.528. The copy is supplied for
private study or non-commercial use only. It is not for publication or further reproduction.
AUGUSTINE AND THE POSTHUMAN WRITER  | /one.lf/nine.lf
with the evolution of new technological forms that are introducing new forms 
of cognition and new approaches to creativity into our lifeworld.
One valid concern and objection that may be raised here is that by admit -
ting the use of generative technologies into artistic and daily practic—or even 
celebrating it—we fetishize the technological object and make a “godhead” 
out of chatbots such as ChatGPT, thus failing to overcome the foundational 
dualist distinction underlying our culture. ChatGPT, in this equation, becomes 
Augustine’s God. Given the absorption of technological objects into a political 
capitalist system based on exploitation of surplus labor and resting on juridical 
traditions steeped in Christian humanist dualities, this may even seem highly 
likely. Moreover, without overcoming the dualist distinctions internalized 
within the human psychic structure, we will not be able to overcome symptoms 
of the “Promethean shame” discussed by the German philosopher Günther 
Anders, whereby the human becomes dependent on the technological object 
(Anders ). Yet this makes reﬂecting on such generative technologies even 
more important, as it will become increasingly necessary to consider how our 
political, social, and aesthetic orientation to technologies can become liberatory 
instead of placatory.
Technologies are widely used to promote self-enhancement and development. 
AI technologies such as AI-powered reference managers or generative AI are 
used to promote accuracy and e-ciency, a reason that they will not become 
obsolete, but will become more developed as the data on which they are trained 
multiply. /T_his is not a value judgment; there is simply a high likelihood that this 
will occur, considering the way in which technologies are being integrated into 
our lifeworld. Given the inevitability of further developments and the skill of 
AI tools in mastering storytelling and narrative already, it is not implausible to 
suppose that AI generative tools will eventually be able to write passable ﬁction 
or experimental texts. An ontology of becoming and an approach that embraces 
new ambiguous forms a-rm such developments, without leaving behind the 
creativity of human beings. It is not the “overcoming” ( Überwindung ) but the 
“twisting” ( Verwindung ) of our weak ontology toward creativity with emerging 
technologies to create a “strong account” of authorship that may be the future 
of writing (Sorgner ).
TAMARA KAMATOVIĆ  received her PhD in German studies at the University 
of Chicago in . She works as a lecturer at CEU’s Yehuda Elkana Center. 
Her research interests include educational technologies, censorship, new phi -
losophical approaches to technology, the history of science, and the history 
of books.
02_Kamatovic.indd   1902_Kamatovic.indd   19 12-12-2024   11:04:4812-12-2024   11:04:48Downloaded from http://scholarlypublishingcollective.org/psup/posthuman-studies/article-pdf/8/1/6/2180986/jpoststud.8.1.0006.pdf by PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIVERSITY user on 14 August 2025
This material may be protected by the Hong Kong Copyright Ordinance Cap.528. The copy is supplied for
private study or non-commercial use only. It is not for publication or further reproduction.
/two.lf/zero.lf | TAMARA KAMATOVIĆ
NOTES
. As Sorgner explains in this monograph on the philosophy of posthuman art and in other 
monographs and interviews, “posthumanism” has its own schismatic tendencies and can -
not be referred to as a single philosophical movement with a-liated goals. It encompasses 
submovements such as the trans-, post-, and metahumanist movements, which have unique 
philosophical backgrounds and agendas. However, the break with ontological dualism is a 
common factor shared between all submovements.
. Postmodernists consider postmodern art also a project of reﬂection, emphasizing postmodern 
art’s ability to become philosophical (Bennington ).
. One very recent example of this is represented by the Open Access Movement and the “Guerilla 
Open Access Manifesto,” which argues that scholars with access to information have a moral 
duty to share this information with the rest of the world through sabotage and disruptive 
resistance including, for example, sharing passwords.
(. What Foucault describes as the “ ordre” (order) underlying all scientiﬁc theories as well as 
philosophical explanations.
. “Musik machen ist auch noch eine Art Kindermachen.”
. It is, of course, possible to point to AI deﬁciencies such asthe self-driving car’s failures or the 
failure of the AI chess player to “understand what the game means to those who play it” to point 
to the fundamental di,erence between human and machine endeavors. In terms of creative 
output, e-ciency, and accuracy, AI generative outputs are already extremely impressive and 
their capacity to become more “sentient” or “self-aware” is not even disputed by technoskeptics 
(Osborne and Rose ).
). Often these “bioluddites” defend terms such as “natural law” to uphold their view that only 
“human-genomes” have rights (Hughes (, )).
. Sorgner di,erentiates between paternalistic and nihilistic cultures by arguing that paternalistic 
cultures are those that pretend to understand what is universally good or right, whereas nihilistic 
cultures are those that teach us to move beyond such structures (Sorgner ). /T_he pervasive 
idea of “universality” occurs then in “encrusted” structures existing in institutions that include 
the Church, laws regulating reproduction and human fertility, and sexuality (Sorgner ).
. While it is true that structuralism no longer dominates the human sciences, structuralist 
approaches have remained incredibly inﬂuential and the movement’s proponents are some of 
the most revered in literary studies, and include Julia Kristeva, Jonathan Culler, and Franco 
Moretti.
. Adorno cites Kant, Schiller, and Hegel as having displaced the idea of the “Naturschöne,” 
that which is naturally beautiful, with concepts linked to the autonomous subject, such as 
“freedom” and “human dignity,” implying that “all that owed in the world is achieved by the 
autonomous subject.”
. “/T_he novel is the form of the epoch of absolute sinfulness, as Fichte said, and it must remain 
the dominant form so long as the world is ruled by the same stars. In Tolstoy, intimations 
of a breakthrough into a new epoch are visible; but they remain polemical, nostalgic and 
abstract” (Lukács (, ).
. /T_his is why Barthes’ essay ends with an appeal to the critic to embrace and celebrate the death 
of authorship: “Classical criticism has never paid any attention to the reader; for it, the writer 
is the only person in literature. We are now beginning to let ourselves be fooled no longer 
by the arrogant antiphrastical recriminations of good society in favour of the thing it sets 
02_Kamatovic.indd   2002_Kamatovic.indd   20 12-12-2024   11:04:4812-12-2024   11:04:48Downloaded from http://scholarlypublishingcollective.org/psup/posthuman-studies/article-pdf/8/1/6/2180986/jpoststud.8.1.0006.pdf by PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIVERSITY user on 14 August 2025
This material may be protected by the Hong Kong Copyright Ordinance Cap.528. The copy is supplied for
private study or non-commercial use only. It is not for publication or further reproduction.
AUGUSTINE AND THE POSTHUMAN WRITER  | /two.lf/one.lf
aside, ignores, smothers, or destroys; we know that to give writing its future, it is necessary to 
overthrow the myth: the birth of the reader must be at the cost of the death of the Author” 
(Barthes and Heath , ().
. /T_hese are just two of the most public scandals to rock the publishing world. Jeanine Cummins’s 
book “American Dirt” was the subject of controversy for her supposed lack of “authentic” 
Mexican identity. /T_he revelation of the identity of Elena Ferrante, whose pseudonym was 
penetrated by an Italian journalist via ﬁnancial documents, represents another example of the 
mainstream’s ﬁxation on the author.
(. In literary studies, it is still common to be identiﬁed as a scholar of an author, for example, 
“Goethe scholar” or “Shakespeare scholar.”
. An example of this might be found in the Apostolicae Sedis , a bull issued by Pope Pius IX 
in , which lays out the present sanctions of the Catholic Church and is based on an 
account of how the rational soul becomes connected to the body at the point of fertil -
ization. Such a view, which has had enormous consequences for all ethical matters, not 
least abortion, also has important implications for what it means to be able to speak and 
write or be an author.
. As the literary historian Robert Darnton () documents meticulously in his study of book 
printing in the French Enlightenment, these emerged in the form of “privileges” and “special 
permits” given by the sovereign—usually a nation’s king but later other (bureaucratic and state) 
forms of authority—that permitted a book’s printing. /T_hose privileges were the only means by 
which an author could obtain rights to his or her work. Built, therefore, into every copyright 
law is a metaphorical dispossession of the person’s creation of their own work. Overall, the 
balance has tipped historically to the higher power that permits circulation of that work more 
than to the “technical creator.”
WORKS CITED
Adorno, /T_heodor W. . Ästhetische /T_heorie , ed. Gretel Adorno. . Auﬂ. Suhrkamp-Taschenbuch 
Wissenschaft . Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp.
Altmäe, Signe, Alberto Sola-Leyva, and Andres Salumets. . “Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Scientiﬁc 
Writing: A Friend or a Foe?” Reproductive Biomedicine Online  (): –. https://doi.org/./j  
.rbmo..(..
Anders, Günther. . Die Antiquiertheit des Menschen Bd. I: Über die Seele im Zeitalter der 
zweiten industriellen Revolution . Munich: Beck.
Augustinus, Aurelius. . Confessions , transl. R.S. Pine-Co-n. Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin 
Books.
Barthes, Roland, and Stephen Heath. . Image, Music, T ext . New York: Hill and Wang.
Bennington, Geo,. . “From Discourse and Figure to Experimentation and Event.” Paragraph  
 (October): –).
Chomsky, Noam. . Syntactic Structures , nd ed. Berlin/New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
Darnton, Robert. . Pirating and Publishing: /T_he Book Trade in the Age of Enlightenment . New 
York: Oxford University Press.
Deleuze, Gilles, and Félix Guattari. )). Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia . New 
York: Viking.
Foucault, Michel. . Les mots et les choses: Une archéologie des sciences humaines . Bibliothèque 
des sciences humaines. Paris: Gallimard.
02_Kamatovic.indd   2102_Kamatovic.indd   21 12-12-2024   11:04:4812-12-2024   11:04:48Downloaded from http://scholarlypublishingcollective.org/psup/posthuman-studies/article-pdf/8/1/6/2180986/jpoststud.8.1.0006.pdf by PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIVERSITY user on 14 August 2025
This material may be protected by the Hong Kong Copyright Ordinance Cap.528. The copy is supplied for
private study or non-commercial use only. It is not for publication or further reproduction.
/two.lf/two.lf | TAMARA KAMATOVIĆ
Freud, Sigmund. . Der Dichter und das Phantasieren:Schriften zur Kunst und Kultur . Stuttgart: 
Reclam.
Haraway, Donna J. . “A Cyborg Manifesto: Science, Technology, and Socialist-Feminism 
in the Late T wentieth Century.” In Simians, Cyborgs, and Women: /T_he Reinvention of Nature , 
(–. New York: Routledge.
Hughes, James. (. Citizen Cyborg: Why Democratic Societies Must Respond to the Redesigned 
Human of the Future . Cambridge, MA: Westview.
Kalpokiene, Julija, and Ignas Kalpokas. n.d. “Creative Encounters of a Posthuman Kind—  
Anthropocentric Law, Artiﬁcial Intelligence, and Art.” T echnology in Society  ): article ). 
https://doi.org/./j.techsoc..).
Kissinger, Henry A., Eric Schmidt, and Daniel Huttenlocher. . “ChatGPT Heralds an Intellec -
tual Revolution.” /T_he Wall Street Journal , ( February. Available at https://www.henryakissinger  
.com/articles/chatgpt-heralds-an-intellectual-revolution/.
Lukács, Georg. (. /T_he /T_heory of the Novel: A Historico-Philosophical Essay on the Forms of Great 
Epic Literature , transl. Anna Bostock. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lyotard, Jean-François. (. /T_he Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge . /T_heory and 
History of Literature, vol. , transl. Goe, Bennington and Brian Massumi. Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press.
Matusov, Eugene, ChatGPT, Mark Philip Smith, and Olga Shugurova. . “Does ChatGPT( Have 
a Dialogical Self? A Bakhtinian Perspective.” Culture and Psychology , article ()X((.
Ng, Davy Tsz Kit, Wanying Luo, Helen Man Yi Chan, and Samuel Kai Wah Chu. . “Using 
Digital Story Writing as a Pedagogy to Develop AI Literacy among Primary Students.” Com-
puters and Education: Artiﬁcial Intelligence  : article (.
Nietzsche, Friedrich. Nachlass , ([)], KSA ..
Osborne, /T_homas, and Nikolas Rose. . “Against Posthumanism: Notes towards an Ethopolitics 
of Personhood.” /T_heory, Culture and Society , article )()().
Pauketat, Janet V.T., Ali Ladak, and Jacy Reese Anthis. . “Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Morality, 
and Sentience (AIMS) Survey:  Update.” PsyArXiv, ) September. https://doi.org/.(  
/osf.io/xsav.
Pavel, /T_homas G. . Fictional Worlds . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Popov, Alexander. . Balancing AI Advancements: Preserving Human Creativity Amidst Growing 
Artiﬁcial Ingenuity , version v. Zenodo,  August.
Sorgner, Stefan Lorenz. . “Paternalistic Cultures versus Nihilistic Cultures.” European Journal 
of Science and /T_heology  : –.
Sorgner, Stefan Lorenz. . We Have Always Been Cyborgs: Digital Data, Gene T echnologies, and 
an Ethics of Transhumanism . Bristol: Bristol University Press.
Sorgner, Stefan Lorenz. . Philosophy of Posthuman Art . Posthuman Studies. Basel: Schwabe.
02_Kamatovic.indd   2202_Kamatovic.indd   22 12-12-2024   11:04:4812-12-2024   11:04:48Downloaded from http://scholarlypublishingcollective.org/psup/posthuman-studies/article-pdf/8/1/6/2180986/jpoststud.8.1.0006.pdf by PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIVERSITY user on 14 August 2025
This material may be protected by the Hong Kong Copyright Ordinance Cap.528. The copy is supplied for
private study or non-commercial use only. It is not for publication or further reproduction.
