Tong King Lee*
Artiﬁcial intelligence and posthumanist
translation: ChatGPT versus the translator
https://doi.org/10.1515/applirev-2023-0122
Received June 10, 2023; accepted July 12, 2023; published online August 1, 2023
Abstract: Although automated translation has been available for decades in myriad
forms, the implication of the current exponential advancement in arti ﬁcial intelli-
gence (AI) for communication in general and translation in particular is more starkly
aﬀrontational than ever. Although Large Language Models, of which ChatGPT is
exemplary, were not speci ﬁcally designed for translation purposes, they are attested
to have attained a su ﬃcient degree of technical sophistication as to generate
translations that match or surpass dedicated translation systems in the market likeGoogle Translate and DeepL. This impacts the modus operandi of communication
and the self-concept of language professionals including, of course, translators. This
article asks how translation as a ﬁeld of practice can best respond to this develop-
ment. It critically re ﬂects on the implications of AI for the conception of translation,
arguing that an alternative framing around the idea of distribution allows us to
rescale translation toward broader competencies and conceive of AI as a prosthesis
of translators ’minds. The article advocates a posthumanist perspective on trans-
lation with a view to expanding its spectrum of skills, modes, and media as well as
transcending the traditional personae of translators.
Keywords: artiﬁcial intelligence; ChatGPT; distributed cognition; posthumanism;
translation
The advancement of AI translation systems has been remarkable, with each iteration
building on the successes of its predecessors. Early attempts, such as rule-based
systems, were limited in their ability to capture the nuances of natural language.
However, with the advent of statistical machine translation, algorithms were able to
learn from bilingual text corpora and generate translations that more closely
resembled human translations. The development of neural machine translation
marked a signi ﬁcant shift, with deep learning models that could better capture the
context and meaning of words in a sentence. The latest iteration, GPT-4, is a game-
*Corresponding author: Tong King Lee , School of English, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong,
SAR, China, E-mail: leetk@hku.hk. https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8885-6887Applied Linguistics Review 2024; 15(6): 2351 –2372
changer with its unprecedented translation capacities, including the ability to
translate between modalities.
1 Introduction
Full Disclosure: I did not write the foregoing paragraph. ChatGPT-4 did, albeit afterseveral iterations. The prompt used was this: ‘Write in about 150 words, in the style of
Steven Pinker, on the development of AI translation systems. Mention GPT-4 and its
translation capacities. Use an academic tone ’. The same method can be used to
produce more extended texts (see, e.g., Howard 2023), including, potentially, anarticle like the one you are now reading. To start this article with an AI-generated
preamble themed re ﬂexively on itself is more than just to provoke a laugh: the irony
created by way of the metalinguistic conundrum aptly captures the mixed feelings
around the rise of ChatGPT and the proliferation of GenAI (Generative Arti ﬁcial
Intelligence) applications it has triggered.
So let us begin again.
Although machine translation (MT) and computer-assisted translation (CAT)
have been available for decades in myriad forms, the implication of the current
exponential advancement in arti ﬁcial intelligence (AI) for communication in general
and translation in particular is more starkly a ﬀrontational than ever. Prior to the rise
of Large Language Models (LLMs), many a professional translator would still have
remarked, not without condescension, that online translation tools habitually mis-
construed lexical meanings out of context and occasionally churned out unidiomatic
structures, particularly when translating across di ﬀerent language families. And
even though Google Translate had been enhancing its capacities in remarkable ways
since at least 2016, the prevailing view was still that MT had inherent ﬂaws that only
human translators could remedy. Today these same professionals may begin to feel
an onset of dystopia for their ﬁeld of practice. Although LLMs, of which ChatGPT is
exemplary, were not speci ﬁcally designed for translation purposes, they are attested
to have achieved a su ﬃcient degree of technical sophistication as to produce
linguistically ﬂuent and logically coherent translations that match or surpass dedi-
cated translation systems like Google Translate and DeepL. Considering that LLMs
are only at their nascent stage, it is almost certain that MT will be able to operate with
increasing autonomy, at least with respect to specialized technical communications.
Why this should be a cause for anxiety cannot be more obvious: an extrapo-
lation from the present state of the art in AI technologies would show that humans
can partially be displaced in the near future across several modalities of creative
communication, including copywriting, tr anslation, graphic illustration, sound
synthesis, and —God forbid —ﬁction writing. A Zoom conference meeting convened2352
Lee
in March 2023 among Japanese-English professional translators on the implications
of AI indicates that at least some participants expect human translators to even-
tually be made redundant (Gally 2023a). With the rapid technologization of
communication via AI, the sci- ﬁrealm of cyborgs and androids is no longer so
fantastical, and the era of anthropocentric thinking will come to its end, if it has not
already. This impacts the modus operandi of communication and the self-identity
of language professionals including, of course, translators.
This article asks how translation as a ﬁeld can best respond to this development.
It begins with a brief overview of the lineage of MT technologies, with an eye to MT ’s
possible impact on the positioning of human translators. Examples will then be
presented concerning ChatGPT ’s translational e ﬃcacy as compared with dedicated
translation systems in the market, focusing on discourse-level issues that typically
trip up MT. On this basis the article re ﬂects on the implications of current AI
developments for the conception of translation. This culminates in my argument that
an alternative framing around the ideas of distribution and posthumanism can help
rearticulate the translator ’s persona and the ambit of translation practice.
2 ChatGPT and its discontents
Long before ChatGPT took the world by storm in late 2022, MT had already had a
visible place among practitioners, particularly in the localization industry.1MT,
along with CAT, o ﬀers an e ﬃcient and ﬁnancially viable way to produce di ﬀerent
language versions of source texts with controlled terminologies. Rule-based and
statistical machine translation (SMT) systems are two milestones in this trajectory,balancing e ﬃciency with a reasonable degree of accuracy. The quality of trans-
lation output is typically ensured by human intervention post-MT. The translator
comes in —or is reduced to, as some would say —more as a post-editor to ﬁnetune
MT output (O ’Brien 2022; O ’Brien et al. 2014). Hence, in his typology of translation
solutions, Pym (2016) proposes that ‘text tailoring ’be included in a translator ’s
repertoire of techniques, ‘where translators legitimately alter what is actually said in
the text ’, with alterations ranging from ‘simple corrections of mistakes, the deletion
of signi ﬁcant stretches of material that is not relevant to the purpose of the new text ’
to‘the addition of new material that may enhance that purpose, as in the case of
extensive explanations of historically dated or otherwise little-known terms and
customs ’(231). This suggests a pivoting of the translator ’s role away from conven-
tional translating even before ChatGPT came about. As Pym (2016: 231) maintains,
since MT
1For a comprehensive review of MT ’s development, see Kenny (2018, 2022).AI and posthumanist translation 2353
has reached the stage where it is frequently more cost-e ﬀective to have translators post-edit
rather than translate from scratch, the added value of our work must increasingly be found at
higher levels of cross-cultural communication , including text selection and alteration. The term
‘translation ’is not anchored to some eternal essence where such things are unthinkable.
(Emphasis added)
Pym’s prescient statement was made in the mid-2010s. It was around this time that
MT made a signi ﬁcant leap forward, arriving at Neural Machine Translation (NMT), a
translation technology described as applying ‘a large arti ﬁcial neural network
toward predicting the likelihood of a sequence of words, often in the form of whole
sentences ’. This represents an advancement from SMT in terms of memory and time
consumption, with NMT ‘train[ing] its parts end-to-end to maximize performance ’,
thereby propelling it ‘to the forefront of machine translation, recently outcompeting
traditional forms of translation systems ’.2
All of this is taken to a di ﬀerent level by ChatGPT, which operates on LLMs
drawing on massive volumes of data and trained on supercomputing infrastructures,
wired with the capacity to reinforce its own learning based on human feedback.
Research has shown that LLM systems as applied to translation compare favourably
with dedicated translation systems on sentence-level benchmarks (Hendy et al. 2023),
at least when translating into high-resource languages like English (Jiao et al. 2023).
This is notwithstanding that the quality of translation is in ﬂuenced by prompting
strategies (Vilar et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2023). Taking this to the level of discourse,
Karpinska and Iyyer (2023) demonstrate that translations of paragraph-level texts
by ChatGPT contain fewer mistranslations, grammatical infelicities, and stylistic
inconsistencies as compared to Google Translate, though errors could still be found.
The fact that the source texts used by Karpinska and Iyyer were taken from
contemporary ﬁction is signi ﬁcant, as literary translation has always been seen as
the nemesis of MT and, therefore, the exclusive preserve of human translators (for a
discussion on ChatGPT ’seﬃcacy in literary translation, see Gally 2023b).
There is the counterargument that an ability to translate by way of algorithms
does not mean computers have any kind of human-like intelligence. Gigerenzer
(2022: 96) maintains that ‘[w]ithout understanding, even a good translation system
remains an idiot savant ’. More speci ﬁcally, MT is susceptible to errors due to its
inability to infer lexical meanings from contexts. Gigerenzer demonstrates this by
having MT translate a series of sentences containing a polysemous word: ‘Little John
was looking for his toy box. Finally, he found it. The box was in the pen . John was
very happy ’. Gigerenzer ﬁnds, at the time of his writing, that DeepL could indeed
read ‘the pen ’correctly, that is, as not referring to the piece of stationery but to an
enclosure for kids or animals. However, he ﬁnds that simply changing ‘the pen ’to‘his
2https://deepai.org/machine-learning-glossary-and-terms/neural-machine-translation.2354 Lee
pen’was enough to confound the machine, which in the latter case would render
‘pen’in German as if it were the writing instrument: Die Schachtel war in seiner Feder
(97). This, for Gigerenzer, evidences MT ’s inability to perform contextual interpre-
tation for want of human psychology, hence his conviction that ‘deep learning in
itself will come to be seen as a cul-de-sac. Without the help of human psychology, it
will become clearer that the application of this type of machine learning to unstable
situations eventually runs up against insurmountable limitations. We will ﬁnally
r e c o g n i z et h a tm o r ec o m p u t i n gp o w e rm akes machines faster, not smarter ’
(Gigerenzer 2023: n.p.).
Gigerenzer is right, though we should add two caveats to his argument. First, not
all writing we encounter in our daily or professional lives involves linguistically
tricky situations as with ambiguity and polysemy. The latter belong to the domain of
creative writing, but even here, contrary to popular assumption, one must not too
hastily assume that MT is completely untenable (see Karpinska and Iyyer 2023; Gally
2023b). As noted earlier, specialized translation involving texts with iterative
structures and controlled vocabulary is eminently automatable even before the
advent of LLMs. Second, Gigerenzer ’s experiment needs updating, given that any test
run through MT systems is contingent on the state of the art at the time of writing .I n
July 2023 I ran the same passage through ChatGPT-4 and the problematic segment
‘The box was in his pen ’was rendered in German as Die Kiste war in seinem Gehege ,
hence giving the correct equivalent of ‘pen’in the context of the passage, namely
‘enclosure ’(Gehege ). This does not invalidate Gigerenzer ’s argument, but it does
mean we cannot take for granted the presumed weakness of AI with respect to
contextual work. Even if AI can never acquire human logic, they may be able to mimic
such logic to an extent that enables them to serve as adequate stand-ins in handling
instrumental translation tasks. In this regard, Gigerenzer ’s (2022) suggestion that
human translators have a perennial advantage over their machine counterparts, and
that ‘how to teach a neural network to acquire common sense remains an unsur-
passed challenge ’(97), may need to be quali ﬁed. The next section presents examples
that go some way toward such quali ﬁcation.
3 Discourse issues
To date research on ChatGPT ’s translational capacity, mostly carried out by
computing specialists, is quantitative and statistical. This section presents a more
textured analysis on the program ’seﬃcacy in translation. Similar to Gigerenzer ’s
‘pen’example, the cases below revolve around the discourse-level aspects of cohe-
sion and coherence, both of which involve contextual work beyond sentence level.AI and posthumanist translation 2355
These aspects are generally challenging for the amateur translator and, we might
hypothesize, for ChatGPT as well.
A methodological caveat is in order. A key limitation in performing tests on
ChatGPT should be recognized from the outset, namely the inconsistency of results.
For better or worse, ChatGPT allows users to generate any number of di ﬀerent
translations of the same passage through iterative prompting.3The technology is also
still evolving, and so running the same passage through di ﬀerent versions of the
program will likely come up with di ﬀerent results. Thus, tests or experiments con-
ducted with ChatGPT are not necessarily replicable, and so any claims made on thebasis of a given set of results can only be contingent, as subsequent iterations will
produce outcomes that may or may not corroborate those initial claims. This need
not discourage us from making preliminary observations based on the technology at
the time of writing. Of interest to us is what ChatGPT can potentially do as compared
to dedicated translation programs and also human translators, irrespective of the
iterations. The critical re ﬂections arising from the observations will thus likely
remain relevant even if the speci ﬁc translations in the examples are superseded by
the time this article is published and read.
3.1 Cohesion
In discourse linguistics, cohesion refers to ‘the network of lexical, grammatical and
other relations that provide links between various parts of a text ’; these links
function to ‘organize and, to some extent, create a text, for instance by requiring
the reader to interpret words and expressions by reference to other words and
expressions in the surrounding sentences and paragraphs ’(Baker 2018: 194, based on
Halliday and Hasan 1976). One of the most common cohesion devices in English is
pronominal reference —the use of pronouns to refer to an antecedent entity,
participant, or event in the same text. In topic-prominent and pro-drop languages
like Japanese (Hasegawa 2014), however, cohesion works di ﬀerently. In these lan-
guages, once a grammatical topic is announced at the start of a discourse, it is
assumed to sustain itself through the text that follows until a new topic appears. A
corollary of this is that subjects are not a mandatory component in Japanese clauses.
3This is in contrast to dedicated translation programs like Google Translate, DeepL, and Bing
Microsoft Translator, whose results are relatively stable over a period of time (Gally 2023c), although
these deep learning models are continuously retrained based on new data, which means their output
is also in- ﬂux (Kenny 2022: 45 –46). For practical purposes, this instability of output by ChatGPT need
not be a limitation, for it means the program can instantly generate multiple spontaneous solutions
around a given prompt, hence providing potentially more options for human translators to choose
from in accordance with the speci ﬁcations of the task at hand.2356 Lee
In other words, the relatively low frequency of pronominal reference in Japanese
results in the preponderance of null subjects and zero anaphora. Consider the
following example:4
Original Japanese: シンガー ・ソングライターの 大黒摩季さんは、 今年5月27日にデビュ
ー30周年を迎えました。およそ 1年かけて全国47都道府県を回るライブツアーを 続けつ
つ、 12月14日に30周年記念アルバム「 BACK BEATs #30th Anniversary -SPARKLE- 」を発表。
1990年代からたくさんのヒット 曲を世に送り出し、歌い続けてきた 大黒さんが、 30周年
の節目に思うことを 聞きました。インタビュー 前編は、新アルバムやオーケストラとの
共演について 語ります。
This passage is about the female Japanese singer Maki Ohguro 大黒摩季, who
appears at the beginning of the text and is implicitly referred throughout without the
use of pronouns or co-references. The problem with translating this text into English
is not just that pronouns need to be supplied at various junctures; their gender and
number also need to be determined and rendered with consistency. Let us compare
four translations produced by ChatGPT-3, Google Translate, DeepL, and Bing
Microsoft Translator in early 2023.
ChatGPT-3: Singer-songwriter Makki [ sic] Ohguro celebrated her 30th debut anniversary on
May 27 of this year. While continuing a nationwide tour that visited all 47 prefectures in Japan
over the course of about a year, she released the 30th anniversary commemorative album
“BACK BEATs #30th Anniversary -SPARKLE- ”on December 14. Ohguro, who has been releasing
many hit songs since the 1990s and has continued to sing, was asked what shethinks about the
milestone of her 30th anniversary. In the ﬁrst part of the interview, shetalks about the new
album and hercollaboration with an orchestra.
Google Translate: Singer-songwriter Maki Ohguro celebrated her 30th anniversary on May
27th. On December 14th, they announced their 30th anniversary album “BACK BEATs #30th
Anniversary -SPARKLE- ”while continuing their live tour around 47 prefectures in Japan for
about a year. We asked Mr.Oguro [ sic], who has released many hit songs to the world since the
1990s and continued to sing, what hethinks about the 30th anniversary milestone. The ﬁrst part
of the interview talks about hisnew album and hiscollaboration with the orchestra.
DeepL: Singer/songwriter Maki Ohguro celebrated the 30th anniversary of herdebut on May 27
this year. She has been singing and releasing many hit songs since the 1990s, and we asked her
what she thinks about the 30th anniversary .We asked him about histhoughts on the 30th
anniversary . In the ﬁrst part of the interview, hetalks about the new album and performing
with an orchestra.
Bing Microsoft Translator: Singer-songwriter Maki Oguro [ sic] celebrated the 30th anniver-
sary of her debut on May 27 this year. While continuing a live tour that took them to 47
4The author would like to thank Tom Gally (www.gally.net) for o ﬀering the ﬁrst two examples in
this section.AI and posthumanist translation 2357
prefectures nationwide for about a year, they released their 30th anniversary album “BACK
BEATs #30th Anniversary -SPARKLE- ”on December 14. We asked Mr. Daikoku , who has been
singing many hit songs since the 1990s, what hethinks on the milestone of his30th anniversary.
In the ﬁrst part of the interview, hetalks about hisnew album and performing with the
orchestra.
Here, only ChatGPT correctly identi ﬁes the gender of Maki Ohguro (although it
wrongly spells her name) and consistently uses the third person singular feminine
pronoun (see words in bold). Contrast this with the other three translations, which
show varying degrees of inconsistency in respect of pronominal choice, shuttling
between masculine and feminine, singular and plural. DeepL goes further to delete
the title of the anniversary album and the segment about the singer ’s tour in Japan; it
also repeats the sentence concerning what the singer thinks about her anniversary
milestone (see segments in italics). The worst performer in this instance has to be
Bing Microsoft Translator which, in addition to confusing the singer ’s gender,
inexplicably comes up with the name Mr. Daikoku. The latter is nonexistent in the
original Japanese; its abrupt appearance ruptures the chain of cohesion around Maki
Ohguro in addition to rendering the passage incoherent.
Consider another example taken from the Japanese newspaper Asahi Shimbun
(Dec 12, 2022). This is a biographical note on the actress Miki Mizuno.
Original Japanese: マイペースで 自分の道を、着実に歩んできた 人――俳優・水野美紀さ
んのこれまでを 振り返ると、そんな 言葉が浮かぶ。中学1年生の時に受けたオーディ
ションをきっかけに 芸能界入り。「踊る大捜査線」や「 TEAM」などの 人気シリーズに
出演し、 26歳で初めて主演を務めたドラマ「 女子アナ。」で 演じたまっすぐで 頑張り屋
の女性像には、特に同世代の女性たちから 支持が寄せられた。 演じる役の幅を広げる上
で大きな武器となったのが、アクションの 実力。小学校時代から少林寺拳法を習ってき
た水野さんは、 10代の頃から本格的にレッスンを 受け、キレのいい 動きを作品でたびた
び披露してきた。
Theﬁrst segment of the text before the dash functions like a quotation, using the
indeﬁnite noun 人(person) as the head noun; and as with the ﬁrst example, the topic
Miki Mizuno 水野美紀threads itself through the passage without pronominal
referencing. Both Google Translate and Bing Microsoft Translator shuttle between
masculine and feminine pronouns as with the previous passage. They also introduce
an‘I’into the quotation in the ﬁrst line where there is none in the Japanese original,
hence foregrounding the authorial voice of the journalist who penned the article. In
the Google Translate version, there is additionally a confounding switch to the ﬁrst
person plural in the (mis)translation ‘We received support ’(cf.‘She received
support ’).
Google Translate : A person who has steadily walked hisown path at hisown pace —when I
look back on actor Miki Mizuno ’s past, those words come to mind. Heentered the entertainment2358 Lee
world after an audition hereceived when hewas in the ﬁrst year of junior high school.
Appeared in popular series such as “Odoru Daisoussen ”and“TEAM ”, and starred for the ﬁrst
time at the age of 26 in the drama "Joshi Anna." Wereceived support. Her ability to act has
become a great weapon in expanding the range of roles shecan play. Mizuno, who has been
learning Shorinji Kempo since elementary school, has taken lessons seriously since histeens,
and has often demonstrated sharp movements in hisworks.
Bing Microsoft Translator: When Ilook back on the past of actor Miki Mizuno, a person who
has steadily walked hisown path at hisown pace, such words come to mind. Heentered the
entertainment world after an audition hereceived when hewas in the ﬁrst year of junior high
school. Shestarred in popular series such as “Dancing Detective Line ”and“TEAM ”and starred
in the drama “Joshi Ana, ”in which shestarred for the ﬁrst time at the age of 26, and herrole as a
straight, hardworking woman was especially popular with women of hergeneration. A major
weapon in expanding the range of roles heplayed was hisability to act. Mizuno, who has been
learning Shaolin Kempo since elementary school, has been taking serious lessons since hewas a
teenager and has often shown sharp movements in hisworks.
DeepL does a decent job this time by sustaining the feminine pronoun throughout in
reference to Miki Mizuno. In the ﬁrst sentence, the narrator ’s voice does not intrude
via an additional pronoun and the use of ‘her’to point back to ‘a person ’exempli ﬁes a
now-conventionalized usage (in reversal of the longstanding practice of defaulting
to the masculine pronoun) for referencing inde ﬁnite persons in many types of
discourse.
DeepL: A person who has steadily followed herown path at herown pace —those are the words
that come to mind when looking back on actor Miki Mizuno ’s career. She entered the enter-
tainment industry after an audition when shewas in herﬁrst year of junior high school. She
appeared in popular series such as “Bayside Shakedown ”and“TEAM, ”and at the age of 26, she
played the lead role in herﬁrst drama, "Shojo Ana. Her portrayal of a straightforward, hard-
working woman was particularly popular among women of her generation. Her action skills
were a major weapon in expanding the range of roles she could play. Ms. Mizuno, who has
studied Shorinji Kempo since elementary school, began taking lessons in earnest when shewas
a teenager, and has often demonstrated her sharp moves in herﬁlms.
ChatGPT, in addition to using the feminine pronoun consistently —and also correctly
rendering 少林寺拳法as Shaolin Kungfu —surprises in its use of the third person
plural ‘their ’to reference the inde ﬁnite noun phrase in the ﬁrst line. This latter
grammar is emergent and increasingly prevalent in contemporary English. As it
were, ChatGPT updates its English grammar to current usage, at least in this instance.
ChatGPT-3: A person who has steadily walked their own path at their own pace —when looking
back on the career of actor Miki Mizuno, such words come to mind. She entered the enter-
tainment industry after an audition she took in herﬁrst year of junior high school. She
appeared in popular series like “Bayside Shakedown ”and“TEAM, ”and in her ﬁrstleading role
in the drama “Joshi Ana ”at the age of 26, shereceived support from women of hergenerationAI and posthumanist translation 2359
forherportrayal of a straightforward and hardworking female character. A major weapon in
expanding the range of roles sheplayed was heraction skills. Mizuno, who had been learning
Shaolin Kung Fu since elementary school, began taking formal lessons in her teens and
frequently showcased her sharp movements in herwork.
In a more recent iteration in mid-2023, a curious turn occurred when the same
passage was translated with ChatGPT-3.5, although this does not appear to be
replicable. For unknown reasons, the program decides to collapse the ﬁrst two
segments in the Japanese text, condensing the quotation ’s meaning into one word
(‘steadfast ’) and changing the position in which it occurs. This alters the cohesion
pattern of the text. In the original text, そんな言葉(such words) points the reader
back to the quotation, whereas in this second translation, the cohesion link is
rendered unnecessary due to ChatGPT ’s restructuring of the original line:
ChatGPT-3.5 :Looking back on the career of actor Miki Mizuno, one word that comes to mind is
“steadfast. ”She entered the entertainment industry after auditioning in her ﬁrst year of junior
high school. [ …]
We leave aside the question of whether this is a justi ﬁed move, as that would depend
on the purpose, or skopos , of the translation. (Following functionalist thinking in
translation [Nord 2018] and judging from the informative nature of the text, the move
might be justi ﬁed if the translation is commissioned for publication in a popular
magazine for a lay audience.) The important point for us here is twofold. First,
ChatGPT ’s choice of word is precise, as the metaphorical phrase in the Japanese
quotation (A person who has steadily walked their own path at their own pace) does
describe a ‘steadfast ’attitude to life. Second, the option to compress a long phrase
into a single word, which is a substantial shift, is seldom taken by MT in general. Eventhough the algorithmic operations governing this particular move is a black box, the
very fact that ChatGPT could implement such a shift shows it can potentially depart
from MT ’s default literal approach and emulate human translators as to how creative
interventions might be introduced.
3.2 Coherence
Coherence refers to the network of conceptual relations or meaning dependenciesperceived by language users to bind a text together. It is the underlying current of a
text often manifested through cohesive devices that serve to explicate conceptual
relations between di ﬀerent textual segments (Baker 2018: 236). It is thus unsurprising
that a lack of coherence is a distinctive trait of MT, which prior to LLMs has been
using a sentence-by-sentence approach to translation. The question is whether and
how LLMs have changed the game. Let us look at the opening paragraph from Sayaka2360
Lee
Murata ’s novel Convenience Store Woman , together with its published English
translation by Ginny Tapley Takemori (cited in Wakayabashi 2021: 198). The passage
describes the plethora of di ﬀerent sounds audible in a convenience store:
コンビニエンスストアは、 音で満ちている。 客が入ってくるチャイムの 音に、店内を流
れる有線放送で新商品を宣伝するアイドルの 声。店員の掛け声に、バーコードをスキャ
ンする音。かごに 物を入れる音、パンの 袋が握られる音に、店内を歩き回るヒールの
音。すべてが 混ざり合い、「コンビニの 音」になって、 私の鼓膜にずっと 触れている。
A convenience store is a world of sound . From the tinkle of the door chime to the voices of TV
celebrities advertising new products over the in-store cable network, to the calls of the store
workers, the beeps of the bar code scanner, the rustle of customers picking up items and
placing them in baskets, and the clacking of heels walking around the store. It all blends into the
convenience store sound that ceaselessly caresses my eardrums.
In the Japanese text, coherence is created through the rhetorical repetition of two
words relating to aurality: 音(sound) and 声(voice), giving rise to a rhythm that ties
in with the sonic theme of the passage. The published English version by Takemori
reproduces this network of meaning re lations by tracing the sound words,
although the phrase パンの袋が握られる音に(the sound of holding a bread bag)
is inadvertently dropped. Takemori ’s translation also enriches the rhetorical
colour of the passage. Whereas the Japanese text reiterates the same phrasal
structure XXX- sound or XXX- voice , the translation introduces greater aural variety
by way of onomatopoeic words that are not in the Japanese text ( ‘tinkle ’,‘rustle ’,
‘beeps ’,‘clacking ’), leading to a coherence pattern that is more textured than in the
Japanese original. The English translation initially appears as part of an article
titled ‘Poetry for all senses: SWET summer party at Rikugien ’, published in a
newsletter titled SWET . It is also published in the online non ﬁction magazine
LongReads .5Judging from these titles, the translation would probably be read by a
more casual audience, as opposed to serious literary critics, thus justifying the
translator ’s intervention.
ChatGPT, which obviously does not have text-type considerations in regard,
oﬀers a fairly competent translation, not least because the phrase omitted from the
human translation is retrieved. The repetition of the structure sound of XXX corre-
sponds to the reiterative XXX- sound/voice patterning in the Japanese text, thus
maintaining its coherence around the sound theme.
ChatGPT-4 : Convenience stores are ﬁlled with sounds . The chime when a customer enters, the
idol’svoice promoting new products on the in-store broadcast. The clerk ’scalls , the sound of
scanning barcodes. The sound of putting items in a basket, the sound of grasping a bread bag,
5https://longreads.com/2018/08/14/convenience-store-woman/.AI and posthumanist translation 2361
and the sound of heels walking around the store. All of these sounds mix together, becoming
the“sound of the convenience store, ”constantly touching my eardrums.
Assuming that Takemori ’s translation is the benchmark (disregarding the omission for
now), ChatGPT ’s version falls short slightly in terms of the texture of coherence due to
its mundane reiteration of the word ‘sound ’following the original Japanese. But all is
not lost, and herein lies ChatGPT ’s potential: the coherence pattern can be modulated
by way of prompting. To test this hypothesis, I started a new conversation and asked
ChatGPT to translate the same Japanese passage using the following prompt:
You are a Japanese-English translator. I want you to translate into English the following passage
in which sound is a key theme, as expressed in the phrases チャイムの 音,アイドルの 声,掛け声,
スキャンする 音,入れる音,られる音,ヒールの 音, andコンビニの 音. When translating the
passage, ensure that the sound theme is adequately expressed in the English translation. The
passage is as follows: [Japanese text].
This relatively elaborate prompt containing a speci ﬁc instruction to focus on the
sound theme yields a di ﬀerent output as follows:
ChatGPT-4 : Convenience stores are ﬁlled with sounds . From the chime that rings as customers
enter, to the voices of idols promoting new products over the in-store broadcast. The clerk ’s
spirited calls are accompanied by the beeping of barcode scans, the noise of items being placed
in baskets, the crinkling of bread bags being grasped, and the clicking of heels as people walk
around inside. All these sounds blend together, creating the “sound of the convenience store ”
that constantly touches my eardrums.
As compared with its ﬁrst translation, ChatGPT shows more variety in sound-related
vocabulary in this latter version, texturing the coherence of its translation approxi-
mately to the standard of the one published in the newsletter —not to mention that the
human translation omits a phrase while ChatGPT does not. This indicates that
ChatGPT has the potential to create feasible and publishable translations as long as it
is guided with carefully written prompts. This has important implications for theconception of translation and the positioning of translators, to which we now turn.
4 The translator ’s persona: wordsmith to
consultant
None of the foregoing examples are meant to show that ChatGPT can substitute
human translators on a general basis —not yet at least. The program has no regard
for performance reliability as well as ethical responsibility; and although pre-
liminary evidence suggests that ChatGPT may register a better overall performance2362 Lee
than dedicated translation systems, particularly on the level of discourse, it is still
prone to errors (Gally 2023c). Be that as it may, the examples do show that neural
networks, even without the capacity to think, nonetheless have the potential to o ﬀer
translation solutions with a semblance of‘common sense ’(cf. Gigerenzer 2022: 97).
They indicate a development trajectory in AI technologies that will shake up trans-
lating as a vocation. Even post-editing —the fallback plan, so to speak, for human
translators —can in part be taken over by intelligent systems through, for instance,
the iterative use of prompts. It seems inevitable, then, that translators will gradually
recede to the role of post-post-editors, then post-post-post-editors and so on. Ulti-mately, a paradoxical point may be reached where translators do anything but
translate, serving for instance as bilingual consultants or language project managers
working at a remove from translating per se. This predicament (if it should be seen as
a predicament at all), while not entirely new, is now imminent.
In coming to terms with this paradigm shift, a di ﬀerent imaginary of translation
is in order, one that rescales the ambit of translation beyond meaning transfer and
text production, and that considers technology not as a supplement to but apros-
thesis ofthe human intellect. In terms of its conception, translation as an event can no
longer be restricted to translating as an act , given that AI and other communicative
modalities will increasingly be drawn into and embedded within the work ﬂow. In
this new ecology, translation is a networked and (partially or wholly) programmable
event involving multiple agents working in orchestration, not an isolated act
executed by individual professionals.
The upshot of this is a radical shift in the translator ’s role and persona. Trans-
lators would pivot their creative energies away from the technicalities of linguistic
equivalence toward the logics of metadiscourse, of which ChatGPT prompts are an
instantiation. In this regard, within the short to mid-term at least, designing precise
prompts to lead ChatGPT (or other AI applications) toward producing desired out-
comes would become an integral skill. The rise of what is called prompt engineering,
however, is only a symptom of the broader shift whereby the translator ’s toolkit
would now have to include principles, strategies, and techniques pertinent to
translation even if they are strictly speaking not about translating per se. And as
mentioned earlier, AI technologies would likely compel a fundamental shift in the
locus of translators ’work from the doing of translating toward the consulting and
managing of crosscultural projects. As Pym (2023a) predicts, in addition to prompt
writing, project management is set to become an important aspect of the translation
profession. Rather than primarily linguistic and solitary, the translator ’s job would
lean toward the logistical and the interpersonal.
Such a development, in an uncanny way, harks us back to the theory of trans-
lational action advanced in the 1980s by the German functionalist school in trans-
lation studies. In this theory, translation-as-action refers broadly to ‘the process ofAI and posthumanist translation 2363
producing a message transmitter of a certain kind, designed to be employed in
superordinate action systems in order to coordinate actional and communicative
cooperation ’(Holz-Mänttäri in Nord 2018: 13). It then makes sense to think of
translation as an interpersonal and interactional event involving a host of agents,
including the initiator-commissioner, the source-text producer, the translator (in
their conventional capacity), the target-text receiver, and the end-user. Depending on
the nature of the task, the network of agents may also include such entities as
government departments, translation agencies, publishing houses, graphic design
consultancies, and so on.
To this list we now need to add AI systems that facilitate the stages of, minimally,
source-text production and translation, and potentially other processes as well. All
the above agents have di ﬀerential roles ‘interconnected through a complex network
of mutual relations ’(Nord 2018: 19). The chain of work ﬂow that connects this series of
agents is what Holz-Mänttäri (cited above) calls a ‘superordinate action system ’. Such
systems are germane to complex commissions that include but go beyond conven-
tional translation. These include the localization of games and websites (Jiménez-
Crespo 2013), crowdsourcing for online collaborative translation (Jiménez-Crespo
2017), compilation of multilingual medical glossaries shared within/across hospitalnetworks (cf. Brøgger 2017), provision of interpreting-cum-consultancy services in
asylum or social welfare settings (Baynham et al. 2017; Blackledge et al. 2018), and so
on.
Following the idea of translational action, one might postulate that the trans-
lator ’s new role would be more managerial than translatorial: to coordinate the
design of ‘message transmitters ’(which can be textual or multimodal) appropriate to
the commission at hand, as well as to facilitate the cooperation among all agents
involved, including AI translation systems. Such coordination and facilitation would
often transcend the borders of language, but also modes and media, and, impor-
tantly, established disciplinary boundaries, where questions like ‘Isthat called
translation? ’would be immaterial. With a change in the translator ’s persona from
that of a wordsmith working with textual material to that of a project manager or
consultant working across languages, modes, and media, the ontological grounds
upon which the translation profession is based will shift as well. It is here that we
must recall Pym ’s (2016: 231) remark, cited earlier, that translation as a word-concept
‘is not anchored to some eternal essence ’bound to desk(top)-based translating, and
that‘the added value of our work must increasingly be found at higher levels of cross-
cultural communication, including text selection and alteration ’. In light of
ChatGPT ’s potential in translation, it is apparent that the translator ’s rescaling to
‘higher levels of cross-cultural communication ’will be more tectonic than going from
translating to post-editing. It entails a complex repertoire of skills —logistical,
managerial, interpersonal —needed for intercultural communication and2364
Lee
transmedial decision-making. The façade of the translation profession will undergo
an inexorable change.
The rami ﬁcations are immense. Ontologically, translation as such will di ﬀuse
into the translational, which includes but is not limited to the transfer of meaning
between languages. If, as proposed by Pym, the job speci ﬁcations of translators
should indeed move toward higher levels of communication under the new tech-
nological order, their mindset and self-concept will need to be adapted accordingly.
We have already noted that the personae of translators will morph toward the
managerial and logistical; this, in turn, will trigger fundamental changes in thenature of translation training —including self-development on the part of profes-
sional translators who may not have undergone institutionalized training. A perti-
nent question to ask is whether the relatively static criteria used to assess translation
quality, whether in the industry or in the classroom, are still e ﬃcacious. Take, for
example, the marking rubrics for the ﬁnal capstone project adopted by the Master of
Arts in Translation programme under which I am currently teaching in my uni-
versity. The project requires students to translate a piece of text either from Chinese
into English or vice versa (weighted 80 %) and write a translator ’s preface on the
basis of their capstone experience (weighted 20 %). The rubrics comprise two sec-tions, one for the translation itself and the other for the preface. The former consists
of four parameters, the ﬁrst three of which are Faithfulness, Grammar and Structure,
and Style (the fourth being Learning Attitude, immaterial to the present discussion).
To obtain a grade within the A-range for the translation itself, a student ’s output must
fulﬁll the following requirements under the three parameters:
Faithfulness
Has demonstrated an excellent understanding of the source text and is able to translate it
faithfully without any unnecessary additions or omissions
Grammar and Structure
Hasminimal grammatical errors and has rendered a readable translation; has presented a
coherent piece of work with e ﬀective use of language devices
Style
Has demonstrated an excellent command of language , in the sense of having adopted a style
that aligns with that of the genre of the source text; has used proper diction, collocations, andmanipulated a variety of language structures e ﬀectively
These grade descriptions are by no means singular; the requirements with respect to
grammaticality, diction, collocation, and structure are fundamental to all language-AI and posthumanist translation 2365
related courses. They also resonate with the requirements of professional translation
certiﬁcation tests. For example, Australia ’s National Accreditation Authority for
Translators and Interpreters (NAATI) sets language competency as its ﬁrst KSA
(knowledge, skills, attributes) for accredited translators. According to their formal
deﬁnition, language competency comprises vocabulary knowledge, grammar
knowledge and idiomatic knowledge of two languages in relation to the following
aspects (NAATI 2015: para 5.1): register and style appropriate to end use; idiomatic
collocation, lexis and syntax; vocabulary, including non-standard forms and foreign
loan words; grammatical structures, including tense, mood, aspect, voice, gender andgrammatical numbers; punctuation and paragraphing; orthography and its varia-
tions; word and language usage appropriate to audience and context; pragmatics,
i.e. the underlying meaning of language in context; and textual devices that create
cohesion and coherence.
Descriptors such as these converge on an obsession with the mechanics of
translating. One problem is that they fail to account for dynamic criteria of trans-
lation quality assessment in the digital age, where the phenomenon of ‘post-print
translation literacies ’(Cronin 2013: 100) means that not every piece of translation
needs to be immaculate —‘good enough ’(Hönig and P. Kussmaul in Pym 2023b: 62 –
64) or ‘ﬁt for purpose ’(Drugan 2013) su ﬃces in many professional settings. And even
if‘good enough ’is not good enough, as it were, many of the requirements in tradi-
tional rubrics are arguably achievable by AI, for which producing a faithful ,
readable translation with minimal grammatical errors and demonstrating an
excellent command of language is not an issue (words in bold appear in the grade
descriptions cited above). We have also seen that even discourse-level issues like
cohesion and coherence are potentially within ChatGPT ’s reach. The requisite con-
dition for this, of course, is a well-crafted prompt: ‘Translate the following passage
into [target language]. Do not add or omit any information ’;‘Revise the following
translation, ensuring it is grammatical, readable, and coherent ’;‘Translate the
following passage, paying special attention to the use of proper diction, collocations,and a variety of structures ’;‘Translate the following passage, using the style of a
[genre of the source text or author/translator] ’. Any one of these or variant thereof
will likely generate di ﬀerent results, which should be seen as a strength; the sheer
variety of outcomes represents the a ﬀordance of ChatGPT to tailor-make its output to
users ’speciﬁcations.
Herein lies the crux of the issue: it is pertinent that the teaching (in the class-
room) or professional development (in the industry) of translation pivot away from
translating toward other skills with a view to controlling, enhancing, or otherwise
facilitating MT. This could for instance be prompting, viz. how to craft a ChatGPT
prompt in the best possible manner so as to enhance the compatibility of a piece of
MT with a given commission. This does not mean displacing entirely the curricula on2366 Lee
contrastive linguistics and translating strategies; these knowledge and skills
conventionally associated with translator training constitute the ballast of the
practice and will come into play in the course of human interventions, if any, after
MT. Conventional translation curricula (or any programmes for professional
development), however, do need an overhaul to make space for value-adding skills at
‘higher levels of cross-cultural communication ’(Pym 2016: 231). Post-editing is an
obvious candidate but also, as suggested above, prompt-designing, which may need
to be fully accounted for pedagogically by devoting entire modules to the subject. And
there will be others, depending on the state of technology at any given point in time.This strategic pivoting from translating skill toward a repertoire of skills aligns with
the prospective shift in the translator ’s persona discussed earlier. If a translator ’s
professional scope is to go beyond translating per se, it makes sense that relevant
skills other than those of language transfer would need to be incorporated into the
translator ’s toolkit.
Crucially, these other skills should go beyond text-tailoring (Pym 2016: 231 –32),
prompting, and other ‘hard ’skills to encompass the ‘softer ’skills of critical-creative
thinking on intercultural communication and of managing language-based projects,
including their interactional and interpersonal dimensions. Returning to theassessment rubrics used in the MA programme I teach for, recall that students are
required to write a preface after completing their translation; in order to attract an
A-range grade for this component, a translator ’s preface needs to ‘[address] inter-
esting translation problems encountered and translation approaches adopted with
very relevant examples ’and show ‘[a] clear understanding of the translation the-
ories employed ’. This is all good, and perhaps we might also require students to
discuss how they organize their tools and resources, including human resources (e.g.,
interacting with supervisors or other resource persons like proof-readers), in the
course of the project. However, this preface component accounts for only 20 % of the
ﬁnal grade as opposed to the 80 % weighting accorded to the translation output itself.
Judging from how translation technologies are developing at the time of writing, thismark allocation is disproportionate. If, as Gigerenzer (2023) would have it, the
Archilles heel of AI lies with its lack of human psychology, then more premium will
now need to be placed on thinking translation vis-à-vis doing translation in any kind
of (self-)assessment rubrics, and this would no doubt impact the substantive content
of translator (self-)training programs. Ultimately, one ’s reasoned, theoretically-
grounded justi ﬁcation for using certain translation strategies and techniques would
be at least as important as the execution of those strategies and techniques. In
industry settings the analogical equivalent of writing a translator ’s preface is the
pitching of a product or service to a client —why and how a product is localized in a
particular way, why and where intercultural nuances are worked in, how trans-
lational marketing is applied to capture global markets, and so forth. If in theAI and posthumanist translation 2367
foreseeable future the ‘doing ’can be relegated (or should we say delegated ?) to AI —
in part or in whole and to varying extents —the best response is to ﬁnd a niche
outside of the nitty-gritties of translating. This niche lies precisely in the design of
critical, creative, and a ﬀective translational solutions to commissions, entailing
multi-competencies that lie beyond language transfer .
In all fairness, these non-linguistic co mpetencies have not gone completely
unnoticed, but are arguably subjugated to language competency. NAATI (2015), for
instance, recognizes three interlocking co mpetencies placed below/after language
competency. These three sets of knowled ge and skills speak directly to the pro-
spective shift in the translator ’s persona toward language management and con-
sultancy, discussed above. They are: research competency ,w h i c hi n c l u d e s ‘knowing
how to evaluate the reliability of information and sources of information ’(para.
5.3); technological competency ,w h i c hi n v o l v e s ‘working with digital texts and their
eﬀective reception, treatment and tran smission to clients/commissioners ’(para.
5.4); and, crucially, service provision competency (para. 5.7), which describes how
the translator handles the entire translation assignment, from initial contact, quoting and
speciﬁcations, through the translation and revision processes, to the eventual delivery of the
translation and dealing with any post-delivery requirements …[and] the application of
administrative processes in line with regulatory requirements as well as marketing, negotia-
tion, networking, time management, contract management, intellectual property requirements
and determining the value of the services provided.
To narrow the chasm and create synergy between translation technology and
translation competency development, this trio of competencies, among some others
like ethical competency, would need to be repositioned nearer the centre of (self-)
training programmes and factored into (self-)appraisal frameworks. Such reposi-
tioning will facilitate the delivery and uptake of these competencies alongside the
traditionally important knowledge and skills pertaining to language and meaning
transfer.
5 Distributed cognition and the posthumanist
turn in translation
The rise of ChatGPT, together with throngs of other LLM-based applications, is yet
another episode in the macrohistory of the human-technology interface, where
material changes trigger new modalities of translation (see Cronin 2013: chap 1). The
evolution in deep learning algorithms as instantiated by ChatGPT has qualitatively
altered the materiality of interaction between users and machines. This change in2368 Lee
materiality will lead to a subtle transition of communication in general and trans-
lation in particular from the technological turn (O ’Hagan 2013) to a posthumanist
turn. With this transition, a paradigm shift with respect to the predisposition of
translation practice and the self-concept of professional translators is in order.
Posthumanism serves as a corrective to the anthropocentric tendencies of
humanism. If humanism is ‘the ethical outlook that says each individual is
responsible for choosing his or her values and goals and working towards the latter
in the light of the former ’(Grayling 2013: 239), post humanism seeks to transcend
‘the traditional humanist ways of thinking about the autonomous, self-willed in-
dividual agent in order to treat the human i tself as an assemblage, co-evolving with
other forms of life, enmeshed with the environment and technology ’(Nayar 2014:
4). This takes us to the concept of distribution, premised on the idea that commu-
nicative events and human agency are heterogeneously constituted and subject to
dispersal across dynamically networke d nodal points. AI is one such nodal point —
one traversed by an increasing number of edges (connections) emanating from
other nodes in the network. Elsewhere I have proposed a distributive perspective
on translation as ‘a radical intervention to translation studies in enabling a
diﬀerent imaginary of textuality ’(Lee 2023: 376):
Embedded within a larger textual-media ecology, translation is enacted through dialogical
interaction among the persons, texts, technologies, platforms, institutions, and traditionsoperating within that ecology. This gives rise to a di ﬀerent ontology of translation: translation,
like distributed language, is non-local in that it is not the sole preserve of the translator ’s
creative and subjective mind and is therefore not a local realm sui generis. (Ibid.)
Germane to our discussion is the idea of distributed cognition, which decentres
human subjectivity and agency in the way we make sense of the world, and em-
phasizes the role of artefacts —‘things ’in general —within broader networks of
actants (cf. the more anthropocentric term ‘actors ’). AI platforms are one such
artefact-actant in contemporary communication, perhaps a highly privileged one at
that. Distributed cognition has been taken up rigorously by applied linguists (Cowley
2012; Pennycook 2018; Thibault 2011). It is not lost on translation studies scholars
either, speci ﬁcally in the sub ﬁeld of cognitive translation studies or cognitive
translatology.
Distributed cognition in CT [Cognitive Translatology] does not only belong to the study of
professional translation in terms of the complex network of relationships and actor interactionsthat occur in any given professional translation process from beginning to end …It can also be
the complex network of interactions between agents, community managers, programmers,
initiators, volunteer translators, revisers, etc. that can take part in a variable way in any givenvolunteer collaborative project online. (Jiménez-Crespo 2017: 103)AI and posthumanist translation 2369
In Jiménez-Crespo ’s case, distributed cognition encapsulates the operation of
crowdsourcing practices, where translators —themselves consumers of popular
cultural products —engage with many invisible others in online communities as
well as with a multitude of digital platfor ms, tools, and applications. The cognitive
work that goes into the translational prosumption (Cronin 2013: 100) of audiovisual
products is in this sense ‘distributed ’across various actants (see Risku and
Windhager 2013 on the similar idea of ‘extended translation ’). All of this holds in
our AI context, with one distinction: ChatGPT has the apparent ability to ‘speak
back ’. This speaking back adds another layer of interaction to the chain of trans-
lational communication, complicating the in tersubjectivity between actants within
‘the complex network of interactions between agents, community managers, pro-
grammers, initiators, volunteer translators, revisers, etc. ’(cited above). A personi ﬁed
machine that unsettles the conventional human-machine interface, ChatGPT rep-
resents the Uncanny, creating an almost surreal scenario where the human user,
with a temporary suspension of disbelief, speaks to their algorithmic counterpart
which ( who?) sometimes responds as if it ( he/she ?) has real intelligence, even if it
doesn ’t.
This uncanniness, I argue, contributes to the sense of crisis that came about with
the birth of ChatGPT. The human(ist) psyche, suddenly confronted with a faceless
virtual clone, is arrested by a siege mentality. The resolution of this crisis lies with a
paradigm shift toward posthumanism. This requires a comprehensive coming-to-
terms with ‘a political ontology of things ’(Bennett 2010) that foregrounds the
interconnectedness of artefactual entities and material technologies with human
agency. Communication, including translation, is certainly one of those ‘things ’to be
reshaped by this posthumanist ontology. Such an ontology will enlarge the spectrum
of skills, modes, and media covered by translation practice and shift the translator ’s
self-concept toward a posthuman, less anthropocentric persona that transgresses the
human-machine divide. Ultimately, what needs to be distributed is not just cognition,
but also the translator ’s ego.
References
Baker, Mona. 2018. In other words: A coursebook on translation , 3rd edn. London: Routledge.
Baynham, Mike, John Callaghan, Jolana Hanu šová, Emilee Moore & James Simpson. 2017. Translanguaging
immigration law: A legal advice drop-in service. Working papers in translanguaging and translation
(WP. 33). https://www.birmingham.ac.uk/generic/tlang/documents/translanguaging-immigrationlaw.pdf (accessed 7 July 2023).
Bennett, Jane. 2010. Vibrant matter: A political ontology of things . Durham, NC: Duke University Press.2370 Lee
Blackledge, Adrian, Angela Creese & Rachel Hu. 2018. Translating the City. Working papers in
translanguaging and translation (WP. 34). http://www.birmingham.ac.uk/generic/tlang/index.aspx
(accessed 7 July 2023).
Brøgger, Matilde Nisbeth. 2017. When translation competence is not enough: A focus group study of
medical translators. Meta 62(2). 396 –414.
Cowley, Stephen J. (ed.). 2012. Distributed language . Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Cronin, Michael. 2013. Translation in the digital age . London: Routledge.
Drugan, Johanna. 2013. Quality in professional translation . London: Bloomsbury.
Gally, Tom. 2023a. The implications for translation and translators of recent advances in large language
models. https://www.gally.net/temp/llms-and-translation/index.html (accessed 7 July 2023).
Gally, Tom. 2023b. Can ChatGPT translate literature? https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5KKDCp3OaMo
(accessed 7 July 2023).
Gally, Tom. 2023c. Translating with ChatGPT. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=najKN2bXqCo
(accessed 7 July 2023).
Gigerenzer, Gerd. 2022. How to stay smart in a smart world . London: Penguin.
Gigerenzer, Gerd. 2023. It ’s time to teach AI how to be forgetful. WIRED (Jan 9, 2023). https://www.wired.
com/story/psychology-arti ﬁcial-intelligence/ (accessed 7 July 2023).
Grayling, A. C. 2013. The god argument: The case against religion and for humanism . London: Bloomsbury.
Halliday, M. A. K. & Ruqaiya Hasan. 1976. Cohesion in English . London: Longman.
Hasegawa, Yoko. 2014. Japanese: A linguistic introduction . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hendy, Amr, Mohamed Abdelrehim, Amr Sharaf, Vikas Raunak, Mohamed Gabr, Hitokazu Matsushita,
Young Jin Kim, Mohamed A ﬁfy & Hany Hassan Awadalla. 2023. How good are GPT models at machine
translation? A comprehensive evaluation. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2302.09210 (accessed 7
July 2023).
Howard, Jeremy. 2023. GPT 4 and the unchartered territories of language. https://www.fast.ai/posts/
2023-03-20-wittgenstein.html (accessed 7 July 2023).
Jiao, Wenxiang, Wenxuan Wang, Jen-tse Huang, Xing Wang & Zhaopeng Tu. 2023. Is ChatGPT a good
translator? Yes with GPT-4 as the engine. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2301.08745 (accessed 7 July2023).
Jiménez-Crespo, Miguel A. 2013. Translation and web localization . London: Routledge.
Jiménez-Crespo, Miguel A. 2017. Crowdsourcing and online collaborative translations . Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.
Karpinska, Marzena & Mohit Iyyer. 2023. Large language models e ﬀectively leverage document-level
context for literary translation, but critical errors persist. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2304.03245(accessed 7 July 2023).
Kenny, Dorothy. 2018. Machine translation. In J. Piers Rawling & Philip Wilson (eds.), Routledge handbook of
translation and philosophy , 428 –445. London: Routledge.
Kenny, Dorothy. 2022. Human and machine translation. In Dorothy Kenny (ed.), Machine translation for
everyone: Empowering users in the age of arti ﬁcial intelligence ,2 3–49. Berlin: Language Science Press.
Lee, Tong King. 2023. Distribution and translation. Applied Linguistics Review 14(2). 369 –390.
National Accreditation Authority for Translators and Interpreters (NAATI). 2015. NAATI translator
certiﬁcation: Knowledge, skills and attributes. Review process and outcomes . https://www.naati.com.au/
wp-content/uploads/2020/02/Knowledge-Skills-and-Attributes_Translator.pdf (accessed 7 July
2023).
Nayar, Pramod. 2014. Posthumanism . Cambridge: Polity Press.
Nord, Christiane. 2018. Translating as a purposeful activity: Functionalist approaches explained , 2nd edn.
London: Routledge.AI and posthumanist translation 2371
O’Brien, Sharon. 2022. How to deal with errors in machine translation: Post-editing. In Dorothy Kenny
(ed.), Machine translation for everyone: Empowering users in the age of arti ﬁcial intelligence , 105 –120.
Berlin: Language Science Press.
O’Brien, Sharon, Laura Winther Balling, Michael Carl, Michel Simard & Lucia Specia (eds.). 2014. Post-
editing of machine translation: Processes and applications . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
O’Hagan, Minako. 2013. The impact of new technologies on translation studies: A technological turn? In
Carmen Millán-Varela & Francesca Bartrina (eds.), Routledge handbook of translation studies ,
503 –518. London: Routledge.
Pennycook, Alastair. 2018. Posthumanist applied linguistics . Abingdon: Routledge.
Pym, Anthony. 2016. Translation solutions for many languages: Histories of a ﬂawed dream . London:
Bloomsbury.
Pym, Anthony. 2023a. ChatGPT and the training of translators. Presented at the 60th anniversary of the
Faculty of Translation and Interpretation at the Université de Mons, Belgium. https://www.youtube.
com/watch?v=b9U_FUaneso&t=45s (accessed 7 July 2023).
Pym, Anthony. 2023b. Exploring translation theories , 3rd edn. London: Routledge.
Risku, Hanna & Florian Windhager. 2013. Extended translation: A sociocognitive research agenda. Target
13. 33 –45.
Thibault, Paul J. 2011. First-order languaging dynamics and second-order language: The distributed
language view. Ecological Psychology 23(3). 210 –245.
Vilar, David, Markus Freitag, Colin Cherry, Jiaming Luo, Viresh Ratnakar & George Foster. 2023. Prompting
PaLM for translation: Assessing strategies and performance. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2211.09102 (accessed 7 July 2023).
Wakayabashi, Judy. 2021. Japanese-English translation: An advanced guide . London: Routledge.
Zhang, Biao, Barry Haddow & Alexandra Birch. 2023. Prompting Large Language model for machine
translation: A case study. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2301.07069 (accessed 7 July 2023).2372 Lee
Copyright
of
Applied
Linguistics
Review
is
the
property
of
De
Gruyter
and
its
content
may
not
be
copied
or
emailed
to
multiple
sites
or
posted
to
a
listserv
without
the
copyright
holder's
express
written
permission.
However,
users
may
print,
download,
or
email
articles
for
individual
use.

