560
Reading Research Quarterly, 59(4)  
pp. 560–569 | doi:10.1002/rrq.565
© 2024 The Author(s). Reading Research Quarterly 
published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of 
International Literacy Association. This is an open access 
article under the terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which 
permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the 
original work is properly cited, the use is non-commercial 
and no modifications or adaptations are made.ABSTRACT
Literacy has become inextricably bound with machine processes, especially 
in the age of ubiquitous, consequential artificial intelligence (AI). Despite a 
relatively long history of AI involvement in our everyday reading and writing 
practices, the public availability of generative AI tools has set off a wave of 
heated debate—and concern—about AI’s role in our lives. We argue that criti -
cal literacy theory and tools can serve as a foundation, when combined with 
posthumanist ideas and some technical knowledge, for understanding, teach -
ing, and participating in our AI-  infused world. In this paper, we outline our 
theory of critical posthumanist literacy, which draws on posthumanist schol -
arship to re-  imagine critical literacy with respect to concepts of ontology, 
agency, ethics and justice, and pedagogy. For each concept, we build on hu -
manist, critical perspectives to show how posthumanist scholarship can help 
theorize for literacy in the age of AI, especially as AI presents both lingering 
and new challenges to conceptions of human text production and consump -
tion. Posthumanism provides us with alternative modes of thinking about the 
nature of “things” (and ourselves); with an understanding of agency as not 
a human possession but an accomplishment among/within many human and 
non- human actors; with an expanded ethics that accounts more deeply for 
non- humans; and with pedagogy that embraces ambiguity, movement, and 
speculation. Using these ideas to expand critical literacy practices, we offer 
concepts and questions for guiding literacy practice and research, with the 
understanding that these are no longer separable from complex computa -
tional systems.
Although the generative, widely available, and explicit use of AI in 
ChatGPT feels like it heralds a sea change in our literacy practices, 
AI has been a part of our reading, writing, and living for quite 
some time. For example, AI algorithms have been shaping what people 
read and watch in our social media feeds, suggesting words or phrases for 
our searches, and guiding our routes home via navigation apps for many 
years. This longer view of AI, and AI’s shifting capabilities, is important 
for two reasons: first, literacy scholars are not facing our machine- human 
literacy future empty- handed, but have rich bodies of work to build on 
and draw from. Second, a long view calls for taking an active role in shap-
ing AI’s rapidly changing capacities and applications, or otherwise risk 
seeing AI as something that has happened to literacy without our input or 
approval.
In this paper, we draw from critical literacy and posthumanist theory 
to develop an approach for thinking of modern- day literacy practices as 
bound up with machines, and subject to human concerns about ethical 
living. It is our supposition that literacy has and will become increasingly Sarah K. Burriss 
Kevin Leander 
Department of Teaching and 
Learning, Vanderbilt University, 
Nashville, Tennessee, USACritical Posthumanist Literacy: 
Building Theory for Reading, Writing, 
and Living Ethically with Everyday 
Artificial Intelligence

Critical Posthumanist Literacy  |  561entangled with machine processes, so much so that it will 
be difficult to separate out human literacy from machines 
and their data apparatuses. A posthuman conception of 
literacy recognizes that readers and writers are no longer 
uniquely human, nor necessarily individual, but a tangle of 
processes involving human and non- human matter. We 
use the term “critical posthumanist literacy” to capture this 
idea, along with the belief that critical literacy’s commit-
ments to understanding and interrogating relations of 
power will be especially helpful in building the world we 
would like to live in with these machine processes.
Laying the Foundation: Critical 
(Digital) Literacies
This work is situated within—and seeks to expand—the 
tradition of critical digital literacy research and practice. 
From this rich body of scholarship, we draw several guid-
ing ideas for this framework, including an emphasis on 
questioning and dialogue in pedagogy, a social justice 
orientation, a focus on texts and processes in everyday 
life, and an explicit examination of power relations. How-
ever, we also seek to expand the tradition of critical (digi-
tal) literacy. We argue for incorporating concepts from 
posthuman theory into an expanded critical posthuman -
ist literacy. We believe that an expanded critical posthu-
manist literacy will be better suited to address 
contemporary developments in literacy, given the com-
plexity and ubiquity of everyday AI. While we acknowl-
edge that a rejection of dualisms that are characteristic of 
humanism, such as nature/culture (Braidotti,  2013), or 
body/technology, could be readily taken up as a posthu-
man response to the history of literacy practices and 
scholarship, we posit that this historical moment of AI 
development provides an exigency toward critical post-
humanist thinking.
Critical literacy scholarship and praxis have been an 
influential paradigm for work in literacies. Much of this 
work can trace its lineage directly back to Freire (1970), 
whose ideas of liberatory pedagogy centered around edu -
cation as a way to interrogate and change systems of 
oppression. In broad strokes, criticality refers to the con-
cern with systems of power. Importantly, “power” has 
typically meant influence and control wielded by humans 
as individuals or in groups. Applying this criticality to lit-
eracy, Luke (2012) defines “critical literacy” as the “use of 
the technologies of print and other media of communica -
tion to analyze, critique, and transform the norms, rule 
systems, and practices governing the social fields of 
everyday life” (Luke,  2012, p. 5). Furthermore, critical lit -
eracy is not limited to critique, but has the additional goal 
of challenging hegemonic forces in the service of chang-
ing power structures. Upon reviewing 30 years of research and professional literature, Lewison et al. (2002) synthe -
sized a list of four interrelated dimensions of critical lit-
eracy: “(1) disrupting the commonplace, (2) interrogating 
multiple viewpoints, (3) focusing on sociopolitical issues, 
and (4) taking action and promoting social justice” (p. 
382).
In digital literacies, these critical ideas have been 
applied to reading and writing digital texts, and, increas-
ingly, to digital life more broadly. Pandya and Ávila (2013) 
define critical digital literacies as “those skills and prac-
tices that lead to the creation of digital texts that interro-
gate the world; they also allow and foster the interrogation 
of digital, multimedia texts” (p. 3). They highlight the 
potential for challenging dominant narratives via digital 
media production. Strands of critical digital literacy work 
have focused on a wide range of topics, including per -
sonal data practices (Pangrazio & Selwyn,  2019), social 
media (Pangrazio,  2013), civic action (Garcia et al.,  2015), 
digital citizenship (Buchholz et al.,  2020), critical media 
literacy (Kellner & Share,  2005), digital storytelling and 
counter-  narrative (Jiang,  2024; Wargo,  2017; Lewis Elli -
son,  2017), and the role of platforms (Nichols & LeB-
lanc,  2020), among others.
Thinking with Posthumanist 
Theory for Critical Literacy in the 
Age of AI
Humanist theories have long dominated literacy schol -
arship. Broadly speaking, critical literacy scholarship 
assumes a social constructivist paradigm, with its con-
ception of (given) nature as separate from (constructed) 
culture, and with its belief in theory “as a tool to appre-
hend and represent reality” (as described in Braidotti, 
2013, p. 5). With respect to its progressive political 
stance, social constructivism provides critical literacy 
scholarship as a means to de- naturalize social differ -
ences and discursive formations, showing them rather 
to be human- constructed and contingent (Braid-
otti,  2013). At the same time, posthumanist theories 
have also been developing in literacy scholarship, to the 
extent that edited collections of work on literacy teach-
ing and learning have emerged in the past several years 
(e.g., Kuby et al.,  2019). Posthumanist literacy scholars 
have explored how literacy is (and has been) a more-  
than-  human endeavor, examining relations of literacy 
and materiality in a child’s play (Boldt & Lean-
der,  2017), literacy and slavery (Snaza,  2019), affective 
atmospheres in video game play (Hollett & Ehret,  2015), 
and literacy and the politics of ethnic studies (Nicco -
lini,  2019). Much of this work labors to tease out the 
ethical ramifications of engaging in posthuman 
thought and theory.
 19362722, 2024, 4, Downloaded from https://ila.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/rrq.565, Wiley Online Library on [10/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

562  |  Reading Research Quarterly , 59(4)As a contribution to this ongoing critical literacy 
scholarship inspired and transformed by the posthuman, 
we explore four concepts: ontology, agency, ethics and jus-
tice, and pedagogy. For each concept, we describe posthu-
manist theory we are “thinking with” (a term borrowed 
from Jackson & Mazzei,  2013), and bringing into relation 
with a critical literacy perspective. In providing a sketch of 
a critical posthumanist literacy, we hope to offer an 
approach more powerfully suited to understanding liter -
acy in an AI- infused world.
We agree with ecologist and posthumanist theorist 
Morton ( 2013) when he asserts that “nonhuman beings 
are responsible for the next moment of human history 
and thinking” (p. 201). Our continued human exis-
tence—writing, reading, and all—depends on non-  
humans, so it behooves us to think with and about them. 
Drawing on ideas from posthumanist thinkers to con-
ceive of how “human” literacies are fundamentally 
intertwined with machine processes, we outline a criti-
cal posthumanist literacy approach to conceptualizing 
(1) ontology, (2) agency, (3) ethics and justice, and (4) 
pedagogy in the following sections. We illustrate our 
movement toward a critical posthumanist literacy by 
focusing explicitly on AI (see Figure  1), although we 
recognize that our approach is not dependent on AI and 
could be marshaled to approach other domains of liter -
acy scholarship and practice.Concept 1: Toward a Critical 
Posthumanist Literacy Approach to 
Ontology
Developments in AI serve to highlight trouble or predica-
ments around questions of ontology. How we conceive of 
AI, including what kind of a thing or process it is, is conse-
quential for how we teach about and with it. Posthumanist 
theories offer us at least two important ways of thinking 
about AI that are relevant to an expanded version of criti-
cal literacy: an object- oriented approach and a process-  
oriented approach.
Object- Oriented Ontology: AI as 
Hyperobject
As a philosophical orientation, object-  oriented ontology 
(OOO, or “triple- O”) claims that objects exist outside of 
how we perceive them, and outside of their relationships/
actions (Harman,  2018). In OOO, objects are those 
things that are “irreducible in both directions: an object is 
more than its pieces and less than its effects” (Har -
man, 2018, p. 53).
One useful concept from OOO for thinking of AI 
ontology is Morton’s ( 2013) hyperobject. A hyperobject 
is a special kind of object, something so distributed in 
space and time that one of its hallmarks is being difficult 
to see from the human perspective. Morton offers us the 
FIGURE 1  
Diagramming a Critical Posthumanist Literacy Approach and its Application to Literacy Vis-  à- Vis AI
 19362722, 2024, 4, Downloaded from https://ila.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/rrq.565, Wiley Online Library on [10/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Critical Posthumanist Literacy  |  563idea of objects as bound up in “meshes, ” which “are 
potent metaphors for the strange interconnectedness 
that does not allow for perfect, lossless transmission of 
information, but is instead full of gaps and absences” (p. 
83). Although Morton focuses on global warming as his 
primary example of a hyperobject, his thinking around 
this example is interesting when applied to AI (see also 
Zeilinger,  2022, and Lollini,  2022, for more discussion of 
AI as hyperobject). Is a drop of rain global warming? No, 
not by itself, but it is part of the mesh of the larger object. 
AI is similarly difficult to “see” for how distributed it is 
across heterogeneous components in space and time, 
including flows of data, human users, and machine pro -
cesses that operate at different spatiotemporal scales. 
Parts of its mesh are literally invisible to unaided human 
eyes (like microscopic computer chip components or 
Wi- Fi signals), parts are hidden (like human content 
moderators and the psychological toll this work takes on 
them, or proprietary code), parts are physically distant 
(like server farms across the world), and parts are inscru-
table (like black box algorithms). AI is complicated for 
humans to visualize and includes far more disparate 
components and processes than we can see with our eyes 
at any given moment. Just as with climate change, so too 
do human beings and doings get bound up in the hyper -
object mesh of AI.
This theory opposes others that conceptualize/
ontologize things as being reducible to dynamic con-
nections, flows, or processes, as discussed below. From 
a non- dualistic perspective, the mesh of the larger 
object comes together as a type of assemblage (Deleuze 
& Guattari,  1987), and the identity of the “human user, ” 
“data, ” and “machine processes” are not predetermined, 
but are rather entangled in the hyperobject. Critical 
questions of power relations thus become questions 
concerning the hyperobject. When humans are not 
privileged “outside” of the mesh, how can we conceive 
of power moving across humans–data–machines, in 
multiple directions? This prompts us to think beyond 
either apocalyptic or utopic visions of “humans vs. 
machines, ” as humans are, already, part (of the) 
machine, and vice versa. Taking up the idea of person 
as cyborg, or “a hybrid of machine and organism…a 
creature simultaneously animal and machine” (Har -
away,  1991, p. 149), we can think of our human selves as 
enmeshed with and co- constituting the AI hyperobject 
in ways that become important for understanding 
social power. If cyborgs, rather than humans, are the 
“dominant social and cultural formations that are active 
throughout the social fabric” (Braidotti,  2013, p. 90), 
then how does AI as hyperobject take up a way of being 
that enacts power in distinctive ways, challenging our 
notions of the human as author/actor/subject and the 
computer model as an inert technological tool?Process- Oriented Ontology: AI as  
Actor –Network, Phenomenon
The networked view of ontology that Morton (2013) and 
Harman ( 2018) write against has a long history in posthu-
manist theory. The most well- known example of this con-
ceptualization is Latour’s  (2005) actor–networks. 
Latourian actor–networks emphasize the actor- ness of the 
network and the network- ness of the actor. Things are 
constituted by their dynamic relationships to/with other 
things, human and non- human. In a different but still 
process- oriented ontology, Barad (2007) put forward the 
idea that instead of focusing on things, or representations 
of things, we should attend more closely to “matters of 
practicings, doings, and actions” (p. 135). Barad  (2007) 
insists that “the primary ontological units are not ‘things’ 
but phenomena—dynamic topological reconfigurings/
entanglements/relationalities/(re)articulations of the 
world” (p. 141). This also is an explanation of how things 
are actually performative, or processes of “enacting 
boundaries. ” Barad’s conception of agents as phenomena 
formed through a process of “cutting” them differs from 
OOO’s assertion that objects pre- exist in any such cuts. 
Using these ideas, we can think of AI as a phenomenon or 
an actor–network comprised of humans, data, servers, 
computers, and algorithms all pushing and pulling one 
another in a constant state of performing AI. This line of 
thinking encourages us to think about how we constitute 
ourselves alongside our data. The process of making it 
makes us, and can form a part of the agential unit of “us” 
depending on where we make our “cut. ”
Though these ideas are opposed in their framing of 
ontology as primarily concerned with (meshes of) objects 
versus actions, they both provide lenses for seeing beyond 
humans and AI as fundamentally separate and static. 
Rather, humans and AI are bound up together, not separate 
but separable through human analysis, or “cuts” we make to 
draw distinctions from within. For example, consider the 
everyday activity of recognizing a face. In a critical posthu-
manist literacy perspective of ontology, the “face” is not 
merely perceived by a human who is “using” (or not) face-  
recognition software. Rather, the “coming to be” of faces, 
and the ways they are recognized, is caught up in a network 
(or mesh) of human and non- human relations. What 
counts as a face—with all of the deep power implications 
associated with that—is bound up in this mesh.
Thinking with these theories allows us to ask new, crit-
ical posthumanist literacy questions about ourselves and 
our interconnections with AI: How does thinking of our -
selves as tangled up in a dynamic network of human–
data–AI processes change how we think of ourselves (our 
identities) and our capacity to make change (our agency)? 
Most importantly, who or what has the power to enact 
these boundaries? What these ontologies do for us is move 
 19362722, 2024, 4, Downloaded from https://ila.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/rrq.565, Wiley Online Library on [10/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

564  |  Reading Research Quarterly , 59(4)away from the idea of AI as merely an inert tool for humans 
to use; AI also uses and moves us, relying on the data we 
generate to operate and shaping—often invisibly—our (lit-
eracy) activities.
Concept 2: Toward a Critical 
Posthumanist Literacy Approach  
to Agency
We first reflect on humanist understandings of agency in 
education research, then consider how posthumanist ideas 
about agency allow us to take a new, different look at how 
we think of student capacities for action in the AI- infused 
world.
Humanist Agency in Literacy
A dominant paradigm of agency in literacy work, and in 
education work writ large, is that of explicit or implied 
humanism. This humanism often relies on the neoliberal 
conception of the individual as a powerful agent 
(Miller,  2016) and emphasizes individual responsibility 
and decision-  making, defining agency as an individual’s 
capability or capacity to act. Most sociocultural theories 
offer a strong view of human agency, and in fact are predi-
cated on the (Marxist) concept of humans changing the 
world and themselves via objects and mediational means. 
For example, Holland et al. (1998) define agency as “the 
realized capacity of people to act upon their world and 
not only to know about or give personal or intersubjective 
significance to it, ” which is “the power of people to act 
purposively and reflectively, in more or less complex 
interrelationships with one another” (p. 41–42). In this 
definition, it is people who act on the world (not vice 
versa), and there is little consideration of how non- human 
agents might affect human agency.
Similarly, in critical work, technologies are primarily 
treated as tools used to achieve or disrupt social domi-
nance, from a social constructivist viewpoint that sepa-
rates nature/culture. In critical digital literacies work, 
agency has become closely linked to ideas about participa-
tion (including “production, ” “invention, ” and ideas 
around good citizenship) rather than consumption as a 
key feature of critical literacy (e.g., Mirra et  al.,  2018). 
“Digital citizenship” has also become a popular framing 
for work that foregrounds production and participation as 
an important part of being a good citizen (e.g., Buchholz 
et al.,  2020). In these formulations, participation with digi-
tal literacies aims toward molding empowered citizens. 
This is a valuable critical perspective, especially as protec-
tionist approaches tend to underestimate the agentic 
potential of young people. However, conceptualizations of 
“digital citizenship” often treat technologies as tools for 
enacting human power, rather than agentive forces in 
themselves.Posthumanist Agency à la Latour and 
Bennett
At its core, actor–network theory (ANT) advocates for the 
return of agency to things as well as people. For Latour, 
one of ANT’s founders, action need not be shackled to 
consciousness, or, by extension, intention. An actor is any  
entity that acts, that does work in/on the world. 
Latour ( 2005) also insists that intentionality is not a pre-
requisite of agency and that objects are neither causal nor 
“mere intermediaries, ” but rather “things might authorize, 
allow, afford, encourage, permit, suggest, influence, block, 
render possible, and so on” (p. 72). This lifting up of the 
object is not intended to demote the status of the human, 
but rather to restore the balance from a time in sociology 
when the material world was largely ignored in favor of the 
human-  semiotic.
Law  ( 1992) also adds an interesting take on “social 
agents” as always networks. Human “agentic” practices 
(like thinking) are never accomplished by some essential-
ized individual person/body, but rather “that thinking, act-
ing, writing, loving, earning—all the attributes that we 
normally ascribe to human beings, are generated in net-
works that pass through and ramify both within and 
beyond the body” (p. 384). Actor and actor–network are 
inseparable, as actors never accomplish anything—or exert 
agency—on their own, or outside of emerging entangled 
human–non- human networks. From a Latourian perspec-
tive, agency is not something we identify a priori (as in the 
case of humanism). Rather, capacities to act, move, block, 
shift, etc. are described relationally in process or retrospec-
tively as emergent outcomes across a network of actors.
Unsurprisingly, researchers have applied ANT to 
examining algorithms, big data systems and, to a lesser 
extent, analyses of AIs. For example, Tufekci  (2015) uses 
ANT to drive her conceptualization of “computational 
agency, ” warning that “[algorithms] are armed with our 
data, and can even divine private information that we have 
not disclosed. They are interactive, act with agency in the 
world, and are often answerable only to the major corpora-
tions that own them” (p. 217). She gives examples of algo-
rithmic “gatekeeping” and decision-  making that are 
entwined with human actions and that may perpetuate 
bias and even affect voting patterns, like Facebook’s feed 
algorithms suppressing information on protests in Fergu -
son, alongside delays in human- mediated news outlets, 
and Facebook’s 2010 and 2012 experiments to “nudge” 
people to the polls by telling them their friends voted 
(Tufekci, 2015).
Jane Bennett  ( 2010), describing “distributive agency, ” 
links Latourian thought to Deleuze and Guattari’s concept 
of “assemblage” (or agencement ). She defines an assem -
blage as “ad hoc groupings of diverse elements, of vibrant 
materials of all sorts” that “are living, throbbing, confeder -
ations that are able to function despite the persistent 
 19362722, 2024, 4, Downloaded from https://ila.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/rrq.565, Wiley Online Library on [10/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Critical Posthumanist Literacy  |  565presence of energies that confound them from within” (p. 
23–24). Bennett (2010) uses the lens of the assemblage and 
distributed agency to analyze what happened during a 
massive blackout in the US in 2003, highlighting the inter -
connections of human and non- human actors and the 
confluence of factors that led to this unanticipated event—
including elements ranging “from a quirky electron flow 
and a spontaneous fire to members of Congress” (p. 28). In 
her analysis, agency is distributed among them rather than 
localizable to single objects or people. Instead of tracing 
cause and effect through individuals and their actions, 
Bennett shows how an unruly mix of human–non- human 
vibrant matter contributed (with varying degrees of 
responsibility) to catastrophe.
Using a critical posthumanist literacy lens, we might 
think of agency as bound up in human–AI assemblages, 
where humans and non- humans accomplish things as 
interconnected. Bennett ( 2010) describes how her con-
cept of agency, rather than “attenuat[ing] the blame 
game, ” “broadens the range of places to look for sources 
[of harmful effects]” (p. 37). Taking Bennett’s cue, we 
might broaden critical literacy’s focus on understanding 
the effects of systems of (human) power and think about 
agency as distributed among human–non- human actors 
in assemblage. This allows us to ask new, critical posthu-
manist literacy questions about ourselves and our inter -
connections with AI, including, for example, questions 
about power and authorship: Who/what writes a text, or 
is responsible for a text, when AI is involved (e.g., in sug-
gesting or creating text)? Seeing human agency as entan-
gled with AI asks us to think about “writers” as 
confederations rather than individuals, word/image/
sound choice as a joint accomplishment, and the impact 
of texts as traceable to human–non- human assemblages 
rather than singular human authors. Reconceiving of the 
text and author in non- dualistic terms, where both are 
entanglements or enmeshments of nature/culture, and 
human/non- human, complicates a critical analysis of 
power beyond, for instance, placing the individual 
human or group of humans within a social “system. ”
Concept 3: Toward a Critical 
Posthumanist Literacy Approach to 
Ethics and Sociotechnical Justice
A general definition of “ethics” is “systematizing, defend -
ing, and recommending concepts of right and wrong 
behavior” (Wrenn,  n.d.). Typically, humans are under -
stood to be the ones doing the systematizing and  the 
behaving (rightly and wrongly). However, work in the eth-
ics of AI as well as in posthumanist scholarship challenges 
this assumption. Scholars studying the ethics of AI have 
challenged both human separability from the operation of 
AIs and also humans’ status as the only ones capable of 
moral agency (Behdadi & Munthe,  2020). Given these new developments, it makes sense to draw on ideas of ethics 
that complicate human/ethics relations. In addition to 
drawing on posthumanist theories, literacy scholars can 
also draw on work from the field of AI ethics, discussed 
below.
Drawing on Disciplinary AI Ethics 
Scholarship
In critical literacies work, scholars and practitioners aspire 
to be ethical, invoking ideals of justice, democracy, and 
equity frequently. However, literacies scholarship rarely 
examines the ethicotheoretical basis of these claims and 
aims, relying instead on normative and/or implicit defini-
tions of these terms. This is a hindrance when faced with 
the massive changes that have accompanied complex com -
putation, and our entanglement within it.
Computer ethics has had to reckon with the paradigm 
shift accompanying the ubiquity of complex computa -
tional systems. As Johnstone (2007) writes,
Standard ethical theory is concerned with the analysis and eval-
uation of volitional action…there are however reasons to doubt 
whether this kind of analysis based on discrete actions and 
identifiable agents and outcomes—essentially, the attribution of 
responsibility—is adequate to address the full range of concerns 
(p. 74).
Johnstone ( 2007) and other computer ethics scholars 
(e.g., Mittelstadt et  al.,  2016) debate how to understand 
who or what might be deemed responsible given these 
complications around actions, agents, and outcomes. As 
AI ethics scholars grapple with these changes, literacy 
scholars can look to them for guidance in our own critical 
digital literacy practice. For example, this kind of relational 
ethical theory may be instructive when we think about 
“responsibility” for a text as no longer linked so directly to 
“volitional action” of a human author, and could inform 
discussions about what plagiarism and authorial integrity 
mean in the age of AI.
Posthumanizing Ethics with Barad’s “Cuts”
Posthumanist theory also contributes to new understand-
ings of ethics as more- than- human. Hollin et  al.  (2017) 
contend that Barad’s contribution to ethics is often under -
stated, pointing to how the “cuts” people make in separat-
ing bodies and objects have ethical consequences. These 
“cuts” are not pre- ordained, but rather made as people act 
in the world. Because people form certain arrangements 
and ideas about which things are separate, they also fore-
close certain possibilities. Hollin et al. ( 2017) explain,
A focus on agential cuts, therefore, is generative of particular 
sets of ethical responsibilities; though matter itself has stability, 
it is still necessary to be accountable for the cuts that created 
this stability and to grapple not just with the ethical 
 19362722, 2024, 4, Downloaded from https://ila.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/rrq.565, Wiley Online Library on [10/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

566  |  Reading Research Quarterly , 59(4)consequences of these cuts, but with the constitutive exclusions 
that underpin them (p. 933–934).
This reading of Barad’s ethics, as stemming from our 
interpretations and enactments of certain patterns of 
agential cuts, opens up the possibility of different agen -
tial and ethical arrangements if we are able to see them as 
potentially mutable performative patterns rather than 
pre- determined distinctions. This re-  working of agent 
into a separable but not pre- figured entity allows us to 
consider how and why people make distinctions between 
tool and person, human and machine, in ways that might 
help us see different ethical possibilities. For example, we 
might think of a human reader as making independent 
choices about what to read, attend to, or think about, but 
perhaps our choices have already been algorithmically 
narrowed and nudged toward certain content, presented 
in certain ways, designed to evoke a certain response. 
Human readers on social media, for example, often make 
joint decisions about what to attend to alongside AI rec-
ommendation algorithms. Where our readerly and 
authorial autonomy begin and end in an AI ecosystem 
may need to be separated by “cuts” that allow us to 
understand our choices as motivated not only by our 
conscious desires, but also by sometimes hidden algo -
rithmic factors.
With respect to expanding toward a critical posthu-
manist literacy, the issue of agential cuts also implicates 
and raises questions about literacy research as ethical 
practice. In this framing, the question of how we make 
distinctions between humans and technologies, for 
instance, are not merely questions of speculative theory, 
they are deeply ethical considerations. Critically speak -
ing, coming to understand power in these relations 
involves raising questions about the determinations we 
make concerning the boundaries of the human, and the 
technical, and their degrees of entanglement. In this 
modality, critical research does not merely identify lines 
of power and identity; rather, it reflexively seeks to under -
stand how it is performing those relations with the “cuts” 
it makes within its process: how categorization, coding, 
sorting, subject/object relations, representing, and other 
movements in research perform agential cuts that per -
form (a version of) the world rather than merely describ-
ing it. In a posthuman reconsideration, the move toward 
a relational ethics can be imagined as a form of experi-
mentation, moving away toward assumed social norms 
and a unitary human subjectivity and toward open ways 
of becoming ethical:
The elaboration of new normative frameworks for the posthu-
man subject is the focus of collectively enacted, non- profit-  
oriented experimentations with intensity, that is to say with 
what we are actually capable of becoming. They are a praxis (a 
grounded shared project), not a doxa (common sense belief) 
(Braidotti, 2013, pp. 92- 93).Sociotechnical Justice
We have put ethics and social justice together because they 
are closely related and because critical literacies scholars 
often use these terms together (e.g., Luke,  2018; 
Shor,  1999). We have included both for two reasons: first, 
ethics has a different disciplinary tradition associated with 
it that is a key source of materials and tools for analysis; 
second, “social justice” has a rich history in critical litera-
cies but has typically centered human relationships in a 
way that may limit our understanding of literacy in the age 
of AI.
We draw from disciplinary AI and posthumanist eth-
ics a concern with the non- human as central to human 
existence—and, by extension, our ideas of justice. In previ-
ous work, we (Leander & Burriss,  2020) outline a vision of 
how posthumanist theory can help us embrace action 
toward a more expansive notion of social justice via post-
humanist ethics, “where human agents can leverage com-
putational machines and processes to become more ethical 
assemblages with them” (p. 1274). Beyond merely identi-
fying our entanglements with AI, these theories can give 
us ways to think about changing our world and ourselves 
from within the tangle.
Here, we build on that work and signal a reorientation 
toward incorporating non-  humans in our understanding 
of justice by using the term “sociotechnical justice, ” which 
indicates that our ideas about producing equity among 
human beings in social systems are now always also inher -
ently technical because of our everyday entanglement with 
AI (see Collins,  2020 for a use of this term in healthcare). 
This conception of justice recognizes that humans can no 
longer achieve social justice without technological justice 
as well. Justice is no longer merely social and no longer 
exclusively human; it is bound up with ever- changing 
technologies. This notion allows us to ask new, critical 
posthumanist literacy questions about ethics and justice in 
the age of AI: How are texts evaluated and shared in 
human–non- human networks, spread or suppressed by 
obscure(d) algorithms that operate within and sometimes 
extend systems of social domination? While social media 
is the obvious context for this kind of question, we also 
may start to see these influences in other spaces, like 
schools, as AI becomes part of writing instruction and 
algorithms shape and judge what counts as “good 
writing. ”
Concept 4: Toward a Critical 
Posthumanist Literacy Approach to 
Pedagogy
A major concern of this theory is pedagogical: how should 
educators best teach about AI and its impact on our lives? 
“Pedagogy” has been used and defined in a variety of ways, 
from a science to an art (Murphy,  1996). We are using the 
 19362722, 2024, 4, Downloaded from https://ila.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/rrq.565, Wiley Online Library on [10/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Critical Posthumanist Literacy  |  567term to mean, simply, a theoretically grounded under -
standing of the “how” of teaching. In particular, we focus 
on trying to design and use a set of theoretically grounded 
teaching practices that, when mixed with students, con-
tent, and activity structures, create meaningful learning 
experiences.
There is a large body of work discussing “critical peda-
gogy, ” as well as a significant body of work outlining criti-
cal literacy  pedagogy. Although some scholars have 
cautioned against providing any sort of strict formula for 
doing critical literacy, there are core practices that traverse 
this work. Behrman (2006) outlines six types of practices: 
“reading supplementary texts, reading multiple texts, read-
ing from a resistant perspective, producing countertexts, 
conducting student- choice research projects, and taking 
social action” (p. 492). Comber  (2015) suggests that key 
“pedagogical moves” in critical literacy are “Repositioning 
students as researchers of language, respecting student 
resistance and exploring minority culture constructions of 
literacy, and problematizing classroom and public texts” 
(p. 363). There are variations of these sets of practices from 
different viewpoints, but they share common ideas about 
positioning students as creators and agents of social 
change, and consuming, analyzing, and producing texts 
(broadly defined) in ways that interrogate hegemonic 
power structures.
Teaching with Emergence
Posthumanist theory offers an expansive lens for thinking 
about pedagogy as emergent and affective. Rautio 
et al. (2019) describe emergent pedagogy as centering the 
unplanned “disturbances” or “distractions” as key sites of 
learning, rather than pre- designed plans. They emphasize 
that in this model of emergent pedagogy, learning cannot 
and should not be “fully controlled, ” teaching and learning 
is socio- material “rather than individual interactions 
between humans, ” and that these ideas necessitate re-  
thinking individual assessment (p. 233). Hickey-  
Moody ( 2009) explores interaction with music, literature, 
and dance as posthuman pedagogy, where “affect in art is a 
vector of pedagogy” (p. 274). In these two discussions of 
posthumanist pedagogy, widening the understanding 
(and evaluation) of learning to include more than just 
individual humans and exploring affective relationships 
with art are key practices.
Teaching with Unpredictability
Embracing emergent pedagogy is both particularly useful 
and necessary when teaching with AI, a notoriously slip-
pery–shifting in meaning and capabilities, hidden behind 
proprietary claims–subject. Drawing on critical literacy 
pedagogy, we might seek to analyze how power operates in 
and through a largely static text. Extending this practice 
into a critical posthumanist literacy pedagogy, educators would need to address changes to a text that are unpredict-
able and subject to corporate whims, as in the case of an 
algorithmically curated social media feed. Furthermore, 
given the opaque nature of many AI systems, educators 
may not (be able to) know, for example, on which data a 
model was trained, what the model will predict/generate, 
or why it would make such a prediction/synthetic text. 
This kind of opacity and unpredictability poses a challenge 
to traditional modes of critical literacy inquiry, which rely 
on more transparent and straightforward chains of 
(human) cause and effect, and it necessitates a more flexi-
ble and experimental approach where human expertise is 
not guaranteed or, sometimes, even possible.
Teaching as Speculation
A speculative orientation in teaching approaches peda -
gogy with wonderment about what can be opened up and 
imagined in the process of learning. Critical literacy teach-
ing has unique resources through which to enter into such 
speculation, including literary fiction. Science fiction in 
particular has long been acknowledged as an arena for 
exploring thorny sociotechnical issues, at times reflecting 
nagging fears of the day, predicting future dilemmas, and 
sounding dire warnings (Blackford,  2017). In discussing 
speculative fiction pedagogy, Boaz (2020) writes,
There is a reason that writers are among the first people tar -
geted at the dawn of authoritarianism. Writers—particularly 
those who work in the genre known as speculative fiction—can 
offer their audiences inroads to truths inaccessible in other 
public realms (p. 242).
This powerful truth- telling function is but one way 
that encountering speculative fiction can affect us. Some 
scholars have explored the various ways that engaging 
with literature in the classroom can shape ethics and 
morality. Collin  ( 2020) offers four ways: transmitting, 
transacting, clarifying, and cultural identity and differ -
ence. Others have noted how speculative practices like 
Haraway’s “speculative fabulation” can be a powerful site 
of resistance and response to a largely White, European 
canon and speculative spaces that have historically deval-
ued or underrepresented contributions of queer, trans, 
Black, Indigenous, and People of Color (Truman, 2019).
In addition to these functions, science fiction can pro-
vide a way to exercise human agency without fear of physi-
cal consequences. Students and instructors can “test out” 
an idea or an AI and see where it takes us without causing 
offline harm. In physics and philosophy, the idea of a 
“thought experiment” is not trivial or fanciful, but rather 
an important mode of research and exploration with key 
ideas. Such testing out or thought experiments expands 
the critical realm into the imaginative. In this manner, crit-
ical literacy becomes associated not merely with rational 
critique or response to other texts, but also with imagina-
tive lines of flight toward the possible, following and 
 19362722, 2024, 4, Downloaded from https://ila.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/rrq.565, Wiley Online Library on [10/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

568  |  Reading Research Quarterly , 59(4)playing with the relations of the more- than- human that 
are already upon us.
A Critical Posthumanist Literacy 
Approach
Incorporating posthumanist ideas into critical literacy the-
ory and practice offers us new ways to understand ontol-
ogy, agency, ethics and justice, and pedagogy in the age of 
AI. These concepts are examples of how keeping long- held 
commitments of critical literacy, but bringing in posthu-
manist ways of thinking about AI and literacy practice 
with it, can help us theorize for what is already happening 
and what should happen in our AI- infused world. For 
example, when we consider justice as bound up in more-  
than- human systems (as sociotechnical  instead of social), 
educators might work with students to envision futures 
that address how texts circulate with algorithmic influence 
that can often mean perpetuating–and sometimes exacer -
bating–human biases.
Our reading, writing, and communication are increas -
ingly bound up with machines and machine processes, 
including AI. We have found that neither critical literacy 
nor posthumanist theories on their own give us all the 
tools necessary to envision a sociotechnically just literacy 
pedagogy. In our view, critical posthumanist literacy helps 
us think about literacy in the age of AI by using critical lit-
eracy as a foundation from which we reach toward ideas 
from posthumanist theory about existing and acting in 
human–machine meshes. Critical literacies have a rich tra-
dition of pedagogical theory and practice, including an 
orientation toward social justice and concern with demo-
cratic participation, dialogic practices, critical questioning 
of power relationships, and techniques for analyzing texts 
of many types. These commitments and techniques 
remain at the core of our theorizing, but we posit we need 
to expand beyond these commitments to account for how 
agentive machines are entangled with “human” readers 
and writers, and how such entanglements underscore 
questions of how we have been separating out “human” 
identities in literacy all along.
We can–and perhaps must–draw from posthumanist 
theory to guide our critical literacy work as it becomes 
increasingly entangled with machine processes. We have 
summarized these convergences in the figure above, where 
we show in the center column how critical posthumanist 
literacy can provide an expansive approach to literacy 
research and practice, and how such an approach might 
inform our understanding of rapidly developing AI. The 
discussion of critical posthumanist literacy here is one 
entry point into theorizing for a sociotechnically just 
human–machine future that is, just as AI itself, not 
predetermined.Funding Information
This work was partially funded by Vanderbilt Depart-
ment of Teaching and Learning professional development 
funds.
Conflict of Interest
The authors have no conflicts of interest to report.
This work is derived from and builds on the first 
author’s dissertation, conducted in the Department of 
Teaching and Learning, Vanderbilt University. This paper 
does not report on empirical research, though it is affili-
ated with a study approved by the Vanderbilt IRB.
REFERENCES
Barad, K. (2007). Meeting the universe halfway: Quantum physics and 
the entanglessment of matter and meaning . Duke University Press.
Behdadi, D., & Munthe, C. (2020). A normative approach to artificial 
moral agency. Minds and Machines , 30(2), 195–218. https:// doi. org/  
10. 1007/ s1102 3-  020-  09525 -  8
Behrman, E. H. (2006). Teaching about language, power, and text: A 
review of classroom practices that support critical literacy. Journal of 
Adolescent & Adult Literacy , 49(6), 490–498. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1598/  
JAAL. 49.6. 4
Bennett, J. (2010). Vibrant matter: A political ecology of things. Duke 
University Press.
Blackford, R. (2017). Science fiction and the moral imagination: Visions, 
minds, ethics . Springer International Publishing.
Boaz, C. (2020). How speculative fiction can teach about gender and 
power in international politics: A pedagogical overview. Interna -
tional Studies Perspectives , 21(3), 240–257. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1093/  
isp/ ekz020
Boldt, G. M., & Leander, K. (2017). Becoming through ‘the break’: A 
post- human account of a child’s play. Journal of Early Childhood Lit -
eracy , 17(3), 409–425.
Braidotti, R. (2013). The posthuman . Polity Press.
Buchholz, B. A., DeHart, J., & Moorman, G. (2020). Digital citizenship 
during a global pandemic: Moving beyond digital literacy. Journal of 
Adolescent & Adult Literacy , 64(1), 11–17. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/  
jaal. 1076
Collin, R. (2020). Four models of literature and ethics. English Journal , 
109(6), 45–51. https:// doi. org/ 10. 58680/  ej202 030784
Collins, B. X. (2020). A theory of sociotechnical justice in healthcare  
[Master’s thesis, Temple University]. https:// doi. org/ 10. 34944/   
dspace/ 337
Comber, B. (2015). Critical literacy and social justice. Journal of Adoles -
cent & Adult Literacy, 58(5), 362–367. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ jaal.  
370
Deleuze, G., & Guattari, F. (1987). A thousand plateaus: Capitalism and 
schizophrenia (B. Massumi). University of Minnesota Press.
Freire, P . (1970). Pedagogy of the oppressed (30th anniversary ed). 
Continuum.
Garcia, A., Mirra, N., Morrell, E., Martinez, A., & Scorza, D. (2015). The 
council of youth research: Critical literacy and civic agency in the 
digital age. Reading & Writing Quarterly , 31(2), 151–167. https:// doi.  
org/ 10. 1080/ 10573 569. 2014. 962203
Haraway, D. (1991). A cyborg manifesto: Science, technology, and 
socialist- feminism in the late twentieth century. In Simians, cyborgs, 
and women  (pp. 149–181). Routledge.
Harman, G. (2018). Object-  oriented ontology: A new theory of every -
thing . Pelican.
 19362722, 2024, 4, Downloaded from https://ila.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/rrq.565, Wiley Online Library on [10/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Critical Posthumanist Literacy  |  569Hickey- Moody, A. (2009). Little war machines: Posthuman pedagogy 
and its media. Journal of Literary & Cultural Disability Studies , 3(3), 
273–280. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1353/ jlc.0. 0024
Holland, D., Skinner, D., Lachicotte, W ., Jr., & Cain, C. (1998). Identity 
and agency in cultural worlds. Harvard University Press.
Hollett, T., & Ehret, C. (2015). “Bean’s world”: (mine) crafting affective 
atmospheres of gameplay, learning, and care in a children’s hospital. 
New Media & Society , 17(11), 1849–1866.
Hollin, G., Forsyth, I., Giraud, E., & Potts, T. (2017). (dis)entangling 
Barad: Materialisms and ethics. Social Studies of Science , 47(6), 918–
941. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 03063 12717 728344
Jackson, A. Y ., & Mazzei, L. A. (2013). Plugging one text into another: 
Thinking with theory in qualitative research. Qualitative Inquiry , 
19(4), 261–271. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 10778 00412 471510
Jiang, J. (2024). “Emotions are what will draw people in”: A study of critical 
affective literacy through digital storytelling. Journal of Adolescent & 
Adult Literacy , 67(4), 253–263. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ jaal. 1322
Johnstone, J. (2007). Technology as empowerment: A capability 
approach to computer ethics. Ethics and Information Technology , 
9(1), 73–87. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s1067 6-  006-  9127-  x
Kellner, D., & Share, J. (2005). Toward critical media literacy: Core con-
cepts, debates, organizations, and policy. Discourse , 26(3), 369–386. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 01596 30050 0200169
Kuby, C. R., Spector, K., & Thiel, J. J. (2019). Cuts too small: An introduc-
tion. In C. R. Kuby, K. Spector, & J. J. Thiel (Eds.), Posthumanism and 
literacy education: Knowing/becoming/doing literacies . Routledge.
Latour, B. (2005). Reassembling the social: An introduction to actor-  
network-  theory . Oxford University Press.
Law, J. (1992). Notes on the theory of the actor- network: Ordering, 
strategy, and heterogeneity. Systems Practice , 5, 379–393. https:// doi.  
org/ 10. 1007/ BF010 59830  
Leander, K. M., & Burriss, S. K. (2020). Critical literacy for a posthuman 
world: When people read, and become, with machines. British Jour -
nal of Educational Technology , 51(4), 1262–1276. https:// doi. org/ 10.  
1111/ bjet. 12924  
Lewis Ellison, T. (2017). Digital participation, agency, and choice: An African 
American youth’s digital storytelling about Minecraft. Journal of Adoles -
cent & Adult Literacy, 61(1), 25–35. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ jaal. 645
Lewison, M., Flint, A. S., & Van Sluys, K. (2002). Taking on critical literacy: 
The journey of newcomers and novices. Language Arts, 79(5), 12.
Lollini, M. (2022). Time of the end? More- than- human humanism and 
artificial intelligence. Humanist Studies & the Digital Age, 7(1), 1–30. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 5399/ uo/ hsda/7. 1. 3
Luke, A. (2012). Critical literacy: Foundational notes. Theory Into Prac -
tice, 51(1), 4–11. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 00405 841. 2012. 636324
Luke, A. (2018). Digital ethics now. Language and Literacy , 20(3), 185–
198. https:// doi. org/ 10. 20360/  langa  ndlit 29416  
Miller, E. R. (2016). The ideology of learner agency and the neoliberal 
self. International Journal of Applied Linguistics , 26(3), 348–365. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ ijal. 12129  
Mirra, N., Morrell, E., & Filipiak, D. (2018). From digital consumption 
to digital invention: Toward a new critical theory and practice of 
multiliteracies. Theory Into Practice , 57(1), 12–19. https:// doi. org/ 10.  
1080/ 00405 841. 2017. 1390336
Mittelstadt, B. D., Allo, P ., Taddeo, M., Wachter, S., & Floridi, L. (2016). The 
ethics of algorithms: Mapping the debate. Big Data & Society, 3(2), 
2053951716679679. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 20539 51716 679679
Morton, T. (2013). Hyperobjects: Philosophy and ecology after the end of 
the world . University of Minnesota Press.Murphy, P . (1996). Defining pedagogy. In P . F. Murphy & C. V . Gipps 
(Eds.), Equity in the classroom: Towards effective pedagogy for girls 
and boys . UNESCO. https:// us. corwin. com/ sites/  defau  lt/ files/  upm-   
binar  ies/ 32079_ Murph  y(OU_ Reader_ 2)_ Rev_ Final_ Proof. pdf
Niccolini, A. D. (2019). “It’s something that requires passion”: After-  
echoes of the ethnic studies ban. In K. M. Leander & C. Ehret (Eds.), 
Affect in literacy learning and teaching: Pedagogies, politics and com-
ing to know . Routledge.
Nichols, T. P ., & LeBlanc, R. J. (2020). Beyond apps: Digital literacies in a 
platform society. The Reading Teacher , 74(1), 103–109. https:// doi.  
org/ 10. 1002/ trtr. 1926
Pandya, J., & Ávila, J. (2013). Moving critical literacies forward: A new 
look at praxis across contexts. Routledge.
Pangrazio, L. (2013). Y oung people and Facebook: What are the chal-
lenges to adopting a critical engagement? Digital Culture & Educa-
tion, 4(3), 34–47.
Pangrazio, L., & Selwyn, N. (2019). ‘Personal data literacies’: A critical 
literacies approach to enhancing understandings of personal digital 
data. New Media & Society , 21(2), 419–437. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/  
14614 44818 799523
Rautio, P ., Spector, K., & Thiel, J. J. (2019). Theory that cats have about 
swift louseflies: A distractive response. In C. R. Kuby, K. Spector, & J. 
J. Thiel (Eds.), Posthumanism and literacy education: Knowing/
becoming/doing literacies . Routledge.
Shor, I. (1999). What is critical literacy? Journal of Pedagogy, Pluralism, 
and Practice , 1(4), 1–32. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 978-  94-  6300-  106-  9_ 2
Snaza, N. (2019). Animate literacies: Literature, affect, and the politics of 
humanism . Duke University Press.
Truman, S. E. (2019). SF! Haraway’s situated feminisms and speculative 
fabulations in English class. Studies in Philosophy and Education , 
38(1), 31–42. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s1121 7-  018-  9632-  5
Tufekci, Z. (2015). Algorithmic harms beyond Facebook and Google: Emer -
gent challenges of computational agency. Colorado Technology Law Jour -
nal, 13(1), 8–23. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3868/ s050-  004-  015-  0003-  8
Wargo, J. M. (2017). Designing more just social futures or remixing 
the radical present?: Queer rhetorics, multimodal (counter)story-
telling, and the politics of LGBTQ youth activism. English Teach -
ing: Practice and Critique , 16(2), 145–160. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1108/ 
ETPC-  06-  2016-  0069
Wrenn, C. B. (n.d.). Naturalistic epistemology . The Internet Encyclope -
dia of Philosophy. ISSN 2161-0002. Retrieved July 11, 2024 from 
https:// iep. utm. edu/  
Zeilinger, M. (2022). AI art as a hyperobject- like portal to global warming. 
Proceedings of the 10th Conference on Computation, Communication, 
Aesthetics & X , 104–116. https:// doi. org/ 10. 24840/  xCoAx_ 2022_ 52
Submitted October 1, 2023  
Final revision received June 19, 2024  
Accepted July 2, 2024
Sarah K. Burriss  (corresponding author) is a Postdoctoral 
Scholar of Department of Computer Science, Nashville, 
Tennessee, USA; email: sarah.burriss@vanderbilt.edu .
Kevin Leander  is a Professor of Department of Teaching and 
Learning, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee, USA; 
email: kevin.leander@vanderbilt.edu .
 19362722, 2024, 4, Downloaded from https://ila.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/rrq.565, Wiley Online Library on [10/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

