Vol.:(0123456789)AI & SOCIETY 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00146-025-02446-z
RESEARCH
Commodification in academic writing: a comparative analysis of two 
LLM apps
Sebastian Weydner‑Volkmann1
Received: 9 December 2024 / Accepted: 17 June 2025 
© The Author(s) 2025
Abstract
This paper investigates the impact of Large Language Model (LLM)-assisted writing on reflective thinking, building on exist-
ing adaptations of Albert Borgmann’s device paradigm to Don Ihde’s postphenomenology. Academic writing can facilitate 
engagement with our beliefs and pre-judgments, making it highly conducive to reflective thinking. However, generative AI 
tools, such as OpenAI’s ChatGPT and Microsoft Word Copilot, may undermine such meaningful engagement as they ‘dis-
burden’ users of the effort inherent in reflective writing. Still, we fall short when we leave unexamined the kinds of uses each 
writing app inclines its users to pursue. Despite using the same LLM, a cross-comparison reveals that the user interface (UI) 
design of ChatGPT and Word Copilot affords distinct forms of interaction: ChatGPT’s UI design may, in principle, facilitate 
reflective engagement through conversational interactions, prompting users to formulate and engage with their beliefs on 
a given topic. In contrast, Word Copilot emphasizes automated document production, making a similar kind of engaging 
use unviable. As a conceptual basis for the argument, this paper extends Ihde’s history of writing ‘technics’ and brings it 
together with recent conceptual developments in postphenomenology by discussing the apps in terms of ‘quasi-materiality’ 
of application UIs and the affordances they offer as part of ‘multistabilities’. This paper concludes with a call for academic 
writers to critically assess how their tools mediate academic writing and thinking processes, arguing that choosing a writing 
tool for academic writing has ceased to be a matter of personal preference and has become one of academic ethos.
Keywords Borgmann, Albert · Commodification · Postphenomenology · Large language model · Academic writing · 
Reflective thinking
1 Introduction
Writing has deep connections to “critical” or “reflective” 
thinking. Especially in academia, writing helps us develop 
and scrutinize our arguments and beliefs. At times, the rela-
tion between thought and writing is so intimate that writing 
can be considered part of the thinking process. In his post-
phenomenological philosophy, Don Ihde asks how writing is 
influenced by technology and its “capacities and constraints” 
(Ihde 2010, 77): Clay tablets do not lend themselves to cal-
ligraphic letter writing in the same way that pen and paper 
does (Ihde 2010, 74).
The recent introduction of large language model (LLM)-
based generative AI tools, such as ChatGPT, has once again transformed how we think about technology in academic 
writing and sparked controversial discussions on whether 
they should or shouldn’t be used (Milano et al. 2023). This 
is part of a broader discussion on how the use of Big Data 
and AI technologies impacts academic research (cf. Leo-
nelli 2020). I will contribute to this discussion by analyzing 
what capacities and constraints such apps have, specifically 
regarding forms of writing that are part of the thinking pro-
cess. Through an adaptation of Albert Borgmann’s (1984) 
ethical concept of the “device paradigm” to a postphenom-
enological methodology (Verbeek 2005; Rosenberger 2017), 
I will demonstrate that LLM-assisted writing may incline the 
user toward “commodified text production”: as I will argue, 
this commodification disconnects writers from engaging 
with their own pre-judgments and beliefs on a given topic, 
thus undermining reflective thinking.
As will become clear in a cross-examination, this is 
much more pronounced in Microsoft’s implementation of 
Copilot in Word (version 16.88) than in OpenAI’s ChatGPT  * Sebastian Weydner -Volkmann 
 sebastian.weydner-volkmann@ruhr-uni-bochum.de
1 Ruhr University Bochum, Bochum, Germany
 AI & SOCIETY
(October 2024). Both apps make use of the same underlying 
LLM, however. This demonstrates, therefore, that we fall 
short when we consider only the decision whether or not to 
make use of LLM apps for writing, but leave unexamined to 
what kinds of uses (stabilities) each writing app inclines the 
users. Based on this, I will conclude that academic writers 
are well-advised to understand capacities and constraints of 
the different LLM apps in relation to reflective writing. As I 
will argue, choosing an app for academic writing has ceased 
to be a matter of personal preference and has become one 
of academic ethos.
For this, I will need to lay substantial conceptual ground-
work in both Sects.  2 and 3 . In Sect.  2, I will begin by intro-
ducing Borgmann’s main ideas and then continue to discuss 
reflective writing as a focal practice. I will also explain, how 
this has been adapted as an evaluative criterion in postphe-
nomenology, extending its otherwise more descriptive focus. 
In Sect.  3, I will briefly introduce Ihde’s relational theory of 
technological mediation and show, based on his discussion 
of historical writing ‘technics’, how a technology’s material-
ity shapes its use. Extending this discussion to LLM-based 
writing apps, however, makes it necessary to connect several 
more recent methodological contributions in postphenom-
enology. As I will show, such apps can be discussed in terms 
of ‘quasi-materiality’ of application UIs and the affordances 
they offer as part of so-called ‘multistabilities’. Covering this 
extensive conceptual ground will yield the intellectual tools 
necessary for cross-examining the use of Copilot in Word 
and of ChatGPT in terms of their commodifying effects on 
reflective writing (Sect.  4).
2  Commodified writing: LLM apps 
and the device paradigm
2.1  Commodification and Borgmann’s device 
paradigm
I will start my discussion of LLM-assisted writing by 
means of an “analog” detour via Albert Borgmann’s cri-
tique of modern technological culture, which is encapsu-
lated in what he calls the “device paradigm”. This denotes 
a larger cultural pattern that leads to the displacement of 
meaningful practices (Borgmann 1984, 47–48). He clari-
fies this by differentiating a thing that requires our involve-
ment (e.g., an old wood burning stove) from a device that 
makes “no demands on our skill, strength, or attention” 
(Borgmann 1984, 42). In contrast to the stove (thing) that 
needs skill and attention in preparing wood and in starting 
and maintaining the fire, a central heating plant (device) 
“procures mere warmth and disburdens us of all other ele-
ments” (Borgmann 1984, 42). It is the hallmark of tech-
nological devices to provide commodities, here warmth, through a machinery that disburdens us of the means usu-
ally connected with it. “A commodity is truly available 
when it can be enjoyed as a mere end, unencumbered by 
means” (Borgmann 1984, 44).
This technological promise, however, comes with a catch. 
While procuring warmth is certainly more convenient in 
rooms equipped with central heating, something is also lost 
in this process of commodification that makes the stove’s 
demand for skillful effort obsolete:
“In calling forth a manifold engagement, a thing neces-
sarily provides more than one commodity. Thus a stove 
used to furnish more than mere warmth. It was a focus, 
a hearth, a place that gathered to work and leisure of a 
family and gave the house a center.” (Borgmann 1984, 
41-42)
As Verbeek (2005, 178) comments, the “device paradigm 
is thus a pattern in which things that promote engagement 
become replaced by devices that invite only consumption.” 
What is at stake here is what Borgmann (1984, 199) terms 
“focal things and practices”: We are enthralled by the con-
venience of modern technology to fulfill our every need and 
desire with commodities. These, however, forego the neces-
sity of contextual effort and engagement. This inadvertently 
also replaces engaging elements that constitute the mean-
ingful fabric of our lives: the commodification of warmth 
through central heating facilitates dispersing family life to 
multiple separate rooms and makes the social roles con -
nected with heating obsolete. As a broader trend, commodi-
fication thus undermines meaningfulness: “That, according 
to Borgmann, is the irony of technology, it fulfills its prom-
ise of enrichment and disburdening in such a way that the 
disburdening it offers stands in the way of true enrichment” 
(Verbeek 2005, 180).
In his analysis, Borgmann makes a cultural reform propo-
sition that involves caring for existing focal practices but 
also seeking out and consciously incorporating new ones 
into our lives. This is meant to “counter technology in its 
patterned pervasiveness and to guard focal things in their 
depth and integrity. Countering technology through a prac-
tice is to take account of our susceptibility to technological 
distraction” (Borgmann 1984, 210). This reform could lead 
to a more fulfilled and meaning-oriented life, or, at least, 
limit its erosion. This often implies keeping technology 
more at the periphery of our lives to make room for focal 
things and practices (Verbeek 2005, 184–185).
Unfortunately, there is no clear-cut distinction that can 
tell focal practices from non-focal or commodifying ones 
(Verbeek 2005, 184). Instead, Borgmann (1986, 203) refers 
to vivid testimonies of focal practices. While not testable, 
focal practices are, hence, attestable (Hickman 2007, 103). 
Because of this, Borgmann’s concepts remain somewhat 
elusive; their explanatory power relies on whether such 
AI & SOCIETY 
testimonies and his account of the device paradigm resonate 
with the readers’ personal experiences.
For my own argument, this implies that there will also be 
no hard criterion to determine in how far the introduction of 
LLM apps into (academic) writing may constitute, as I will 
contend in the next section, another example of the device 
paradigm. Instead, readers will have to consider my pro-
posed depiction of reflective writing as a focal practice in the 
next section and see whether this resonates with their own 
experiences. Where this is the case, however, Borgmann’s 
ethical conceptions of commodification and the device para-
digm can be productively taken up as part of a postphenom-
enological analysis of those tools (cf. Section  2.3).
2.2  Reflective thinking, focal writing, 
and LLM‑assisted writing
One premise of my argument is that some forms of writing 
can facilitate reflective (or critical) thinking. As a first func-
tional definition, I will term these forms “reflective writing”. 
What, then, is reflective thinking? John Dewey (1978, 182) 
distinguished reflective thinking from two other notions of 
thinking: (1) from broad conceptions of thinking in the sense 
of whatever comes to mind (stream of consciousness, “now I 
think of this, now of that”); and (2) from thinking something 
as opposed to actually perceiving something (“I sit in my 
office and think of the sound of the waves of the ocean”). 
Such thoughts, Dewey argues, can change on a whim.
Reflective thinking, in contrast, rests on some kind of evi-
dence or testimony; it commits us to keeping formed beliefs 
in coherence with each other (Dewey 1978, 184–185). There 
is, however, a difference in the degree to which beliefs actu -
ally rest on reflection rather than on pre-judgment or preju-
dice (Dewey 1978, 182, 191): ‘uncritical’ thinking forms the 
negative end in the continuum of reflection, while “turning 
the thing over in mind” and hunting for additional evidence 
forms the positive end.
To remain uncritical is more convenient, however, as 
seemingly plausible suggestions are simply accepted. This 
ends the “mental uneasiness” that motivates the effort of 
thinking something through.
“Reflective thinking is always more or less trouble-
some because it involves overcoming the inertia that 
inclines one to accept suggestions at their face value; 
it involves willingness to endure a condition of mental 
unrest and disturbance. Reflective thinking, in short, 
means judgment suspended during further inquiry; and 
suspense is likely to be somewhat painful.” (Dewey 
1978, 191)
This is not simply because reflective thinking involves 
effort, but because it may involve the destruction of con-
victions we hold dear. Hannah Arendt (1999, 57) similarly points toward the perils of critical thinking in that it has the 
potential to undermine everything: “there are no dangerous 
thoughts for the simple reason that thinking itself is such a 
dangerous enterprise.” Hence, Dewey ( 1978, 191) claims we 
need to establish good mental habits by continuously prac-
ticing a certain mental ethos. This ethos consists of main-
taining a state of doubt with respect to our beliefs, which in 
turn can motivate us to exert the necessary effort of thinking 
something through.
Reflective thinking can then be understood as what Kegan 
(1994, 231) describes as an “active demonstration of a mind 
that can stand enough apart from its own opinions.” Such 
a mind is able to “keep from feeling that the whole self has 
been violated when its opinions, values, rules, or defini-
tions are challenged.” Regarding current debates on whether 
teaching intellectual virtues (‘character education’) or reflec-
tive, ‘critical thinking’ should be the main goal of education, 
a Deweyan answer thus takes a middle position of integrat-
ing both into a coherent whole (Axtell 2024).
The reflective part in ‘reflective thinking’, then, does not 
so much denote the idea of self-reflection as in certain prac-
tices of meditation or journalling. Rather, it denotes one of 
the most fundamental competences for academic work. What 
is reflected here are our initial opinions, values, or beliefs; 
it is those thoughts and pre-judgments that become the the -
matic1 object of our attention as part of critical engagement.
What is presupposed here is that our beliefs are rendered 
in a fixed form. They need to be actively lifted out of the 
stream of our thinking processes. Making a thought the 
object of attention requires giving it some permanence if 
only for so long as to consider it and move on to the next 
suggestion. Here, we see why writing is so conducive to 
thinking: writing suggestions down disburdens us from hold-
ing them fixed in memory. This is crucial for my argument as 
it elucidates the connection between writing and reflective 
thinking. In a similar vein, Arendt (2003, 204–205) high-
lights the transformation from lived thinking processes to 
thought rendered in fixed form and then objectified in writ-
ing. Writing is not just the recording of a product of think -
ing, but an essential part of the thinking process itself; we 
“think on paper” (or in another medium).
It is obvious that not all instances of writing in the 
academic context can qualify as a focal practice. In fact, 
Borgmann (1984 , 201) criticized contemporary academic 
philosophy for failing to be a haven for such practices. 
Today, one may similarly assess that current academic work 
involves many facets that are detrimental to focal practices 
1 As Husserl (1976, 62) notes, for something to become thematic 
involves a shift of attention to something previously “unthematic”, 
but which was still, if only implicitly, already “there” in conscious-
ness.
 AI & SOCIETY
in research and teaching. Much of what is written has little 
to do with reflective writing or thinking. Where writing is 
neither reflective nor “focal”, commodification may, in fact, 
be quite welcome.
Still, I believe it is an uncontroversial claim that many 
in academia experience the painstaking effort involved in 
“thinking something through” as meaningful work , i.e., as a 
focal practice. Furthermore, this work is embedded within 
the social fabric of the academic community. As Rodgers 
(2002, 856, cf. Dewey 1985, 8) highlights, Dewey’s under -
standing of reflective thinking is not a solipsistic matter: the 
act of formulation implicitly addresses others and requires 
that we move outside of our own private experience and 
consider other points of view. This is a crucial part of reflect-
ing our beliefs.
It is here that the introduction of generative AI tools 
threatens to commodify reflective writing: using such tools 
can disburden us from identifying our implicit beliefs, our 
prejudices, and pre-judgments. This is because they can dis-
burden us from putting those beliefs into a temporarily fixed 
form by writing them down in a form that helps to consider 
them in relation to others’ perspectives. And it can disbur -
den us from (re-)constructing argumentative connections 
between these beliefs and from turning them over in mind. 
This is true at least insofar as generative AI is taken up on 
its promise to produce text without the investment of skillful 
effort and engagement.
In these cases, writing degrades into a form of editing 
or re-writing of “thoughts” that originated elsewhere. This 
implies, however, that the thematic object of the thinking 
that is involved here ceases to be reflective. This is because 
the thinking stops being about our own implicit beliefs. If 
generated text can be said to contain a rendering of beliefs at 
all, it would likely be beliefs that are prevalent in the training 
data. While I may implicitly share these beliefs, it makes 
all the difference whether the formulation results from an 
explication of our own thoughts or whether it comes from 
without. In the latter situation, we lose the moment of dis-
covering what is implicit as part of the explication process. 
Consequently, the commodification of reflective writing can 
indeed be seen as a potential threat to the academic ethos 
envisioned by Dewey.
2.3  Commodification as a normative criterion 
in postphenomenology
As Verbeek (2005, 186, 192) demonstrates, Borgmann’s 
ethical contributions can be productively adapted to com -
plement the more descriptively focused postphenomenologi-
cal analysis we will use in the remainder of the paper. This 
is particularly helpful since Ihde has already developed a 
postphenomenological discussion of historical writing technologies. In this sense, my own analysis continues this 
discussion but complements it with an ethical perspective.
Verbeek identifies a conceptual problem in Borg-
mann’s theory, however, in that he conflates two distinct 
ideas regarding the loss of engagement due to the device 
paradigm:
“The type of engagement Borgmann sees as compen-
sating for this loss is supposed to be regained in focal 
practices, which are valuable in themselves without 
serving a particular end, and which constitute mean-
ingfulness … In contrast to a technological device, a 
thing does not provide the most convenient path to 
achieve a goal, but involves its users in the realization 
of it. The engagement that focal things call for is of a 
completely different sort. Borgmann does not describe 
it in terms of effort and exertion, but of meaningful-
ness …” (Verbeek 2005, 186)
This highlights a crucial differentiation to be made for 
forms of engagement: (1) those that require skillfull effort  
and (2) those that produce meaningfulness. Borgmann ends 
up blending the two ideas together: if “people give up focal 
practices, they do not do this because they use technological 
devices, but because they are entirely submerged in the con-
sumptive attitude that the use of devices invites.” (Verbeek 
2005, 187–188).
In order to counter commodification, technology there-
fore doesn’t necessarily have to be pushed to the sideline. 
Verbeek highlights that it is not so much the technological 
device itself to be rejected, but the disengaging effect that 
undermines meaningful involvement. This directs attention 
to the design properties of specific technologies, as this is 
where commodification “materializes”. Whether or not a 
certain piece of technology promotes or prevents commodi-
fication can thus become a normative criterion for making 
choices about using a certain technology and integrating it 
into our lives. Some technologies may reduce effort but still 
protect engagement, and other technologies may require 
effort but will not be engaging in meaningful ways. “Borg-
mann only admits a single aspect, disengagement, of the 
implications of technology for the involvement of human 
beings with their world, and systematically disregards the 
ability of technology to invite new forms of engagement.” 
(Verbeek 2005, 190).
Rosenberger (2017) takes up Verbeek’s idea of a postphe-
nomenological technology ethics based on Borgmann’s con -
ceptions. He points out that this introduces a new problem, 
however: Borgmann highlights a pattern in modern techno-
logical culture (which is also why his view focusses so much 
on the results of this pattern, the reduction of engagement). 
Showing, as Verbeek does, that some forms of technology 
use can also have positive and engaging effects, then, does 
not speak against Borgmann’s diagnosis of a more general, 
AI & SOCIETY 
problematic trend (Rosenberger 2017 , 491, cf. also Borg -
mann 2005, where he responds similarly to Verbeek). From 
an ethical point of view, hence, little is gained by only show -
ing that there may exist some ways to use generative AI apps 
that facilitate reflective writing and, thus, reflective thinking. 
If these ways are not how we are likely to use the technology 
and if it is foreseeable that commodifying forms of use will 
dominate, Borgmann’s concerns remain valid and pressing. 
Hence, Rosenberger (2017, 491) proposes to examine for 
different technology designs how forms of use play out and 
to then assess how realistic it is that commodification or 
engagement will typically prevail situationally in what he 
calls dominant stabilities (cf. Rosenberger 2023, 2234).
As will become clear in the next sections, this line of 
thinking points us toward a postphenomenological analysis 
of the affordances of writing technologies. As a first step, 
however, it will be necessary to develop some of Ihde’s core 
concepts and the role that materiality plays in them. This 
will allow us to return to Borgmann’s ideas in Sect.  4 and 
comparatively assess the impact of using two generative AI 
apps regarding the commodification of academic writing.
3  Affordances of writing technologies
I will begin this section with a very brief introduction of 
Ihde’s human–technology relations and his idea of multi-
stability in the context of LLM apps. Both concepts will 
be used in Sect.  4’s postphenomenological analysis of the 
affordances of ChatGPT and Microsoft Word Copilot. After 
this, I will reconstruct Ihde’s history of writing technologies 
so as to show how the dominant stabilities of these apps can 
be analyzed in terms of the affordances of their specific UIs.
3.1  Ihde’s relational theory of technological 
mediation
Postphenomenology aims at micro-scale analyses of how 
specific kinds of technologies mediate our experience of and 
relation to the world. It retains many aspects of phenom-
enological intentionality, such as the opposition to dualist 
conceptions of experience and their stark division of an 
experiencing subject from the experienced world. Instead, 
it presupposes a relational unity in experience. As opposed 
to phenomenology, however, it posits that today, this rela-
tional unity is influenced by the manifold technologies that 
surround us. Postphenomenology, thus, typically formalizes 
experience as an I–technology–world relationship (Rosen-
berger and Verbeek 2017, 11–12, 14). Ihde (1979, 6–14, 55, 
1990, 97–108) distinguishes four types of these relations: 
embodiment relations, hermeneutic relations, alterity rela-
tions, and background relations.Laaksoharju et al. (2023) have laid the groundwork for 
a postphenomenological analysis of LLM apps by going 
through each of the four relations. When technologies in 
embodiment relations work as they are expected, they 
become a kind of transparent prosthetic extension of our 
body through which we act and experience the world (Ihde 
2002, 7, 14). Embodied relations to generative AI apps, for 
example, could seamlessly change a user’s rambling draft 
to a well-formulated, concise version of what they want to 
say in digital conversations (Laaksoharju et al. 2023, 37).
In hermeneutic relations, on the other hand, technolo-
gies mediate our experience of the world by providing 
information or representations that are interpreted by us. 
When posing a question to an LLM app, its answers can 
be seen as a highly flexible way of providing such infor -
mation. “When asking ChatGPT and Bing AI in which of 
Ihde’s relationships they are with their users, they both 
lean toward describing the relationship as hermeneutic” 
(Laaksoharju et al. 2023, 38) – a textual explanation about 
itself that needs to be read and interpreted by us.
LLM apps like ChatGPT may, furthermore, become 
anthropomorphized “partners” in conversations, thus 
establishing alterity relations. We can ask them to refor -
mulate an answer they gave and pose follow-up questions, 
thus leading a kind of conversation. “Ihde is clear that it 
is in the perception of the human, rather than a reciprocal 
relationship; the relationship does not require an ‘other’ 
but will suffice with a ‘quasi-other’” (Laaksoharju et al. 
2023, 41).
Finally, background relations denote situations where 
technologies are not related to in a direct way but form 
contextual factors in the lifeworld. One may think of air 
conditioning in a room or of LLM apps that seamlessly 
translate what is said in a conversation to another lan-
guage (Laaksoharju et al. 2023, 43; cf. Orland 2023 for an 
empirical example of a similar use case).
It is important to note that specifically what these types of 
mediation entail depends largely on the situational use case. 
Here, postphenomenology takes a middle ground between 
a variant of technological neutrality, where everything 
depends on how the subject wants to use a technology, and 
one of technological determinism, where the design of tech-
nologies prescribes their usage. Instead, Ihde refers to multi-
stabilities, another one of its core methodological concepts:
“No technology is ‘one thing’, nor is it incapable of 
belonging to multiple contexts … I argue that the 
very structure of technologies is multistable, with 
respect to uses, to cultural embeddedness, and to 
politics as well. Multistability is not the same as 
‘neutrality’. Within multistability there lie trajecto-
ries - not just any trajectory, but partially determined 
trajectories.” (Ihde 1999, 47)
 AI & SOCIETY
Thus, in my comparison of ChatGPT and Microsoft’s 
Word Copilot in Sect.  4, only some of the possible uses will 
prove stable in the end (Rosenberger and Verbeek 2017, 
26) and some of those stabilities will emerge as dominant 
(Rosenberger 2023, 2234). As part of this analysis, explor -
ing the types of human–technology relations involved in the 
dominant stabilities will help reveal their role in commodi-
fication. Since the emergence of a technology’s dominant 
stabilities is closely connected to its materiality, however, I 
will now discuss Ihde’s original conception of materiality in 
the context of his history of writing technics.
3.2  Materiality, multistability, and writing 
technologies
3.2.1  Embodied perception and the materiality of writing 
technologies
In his essay “IT: Clouds and Cyberspace-Time”, Ihde (2010, 
69–84) discusses computer “stations” as part of the tech-
nological development of writing technologies. Here, he 
reiterates a point often made throughout his writings, i.e., 
that he starts from the premise of embodied experience. In 
fact, his re-conception of phenomenological intentionality 
builds on Merleau-Ponty: “To put it simply, postphenom-
enology substitutes an embodied action for consciousness 
or subjectivity. Perception for postphenomenology is bod-
ily and actional” (Ihde 2010, 70, cf.  2016, 130; Mykhailov 
2020, 622–623; Aagaard and Rosenberger 2024, 8). This is 
important to note as it means that not only the embodiment 
relation can be conceptualized through the lens of embodied 
action, but all four of the human–technology-relations. This 
is also reflected in Ihde’s (2022, 129) remarks on what he 
calls material hermeneutics, highlighting the pivotal role of 
bodily perceptual  interpretation of instrument readouts in 
natural science research. As will be noted later-on, not all 
postphenomenologists follow Ihde’s embodied perception 
stance.
Ihde (1979, xxiv; cf. 2010, 70) has often highlighted 
the centrality of materiality in his turn to embodied praxis: 
“only in concrete or ‘material’ shapes and motions does 
body-technology occur. In effect, the secret of ‘materialism’ 
is the notion of praxis.” The question raised by Ihde regard-
ing writing technologies may, thus, be phrased as: How did 
the material evolvement of writing technics change writing 
practices? Or, since a range of writing technics may co-exist, 
how do different writing technics (from chisel and stone 
through styluses and clay tablet, further through pen and 
paper, onwards to typewriters and computerized word pro-
cessors) each shape our techniques of writing? Here, mate-
riality plays a crucial role in embodied use, as, for example, 
a Roman chisel and stone lends itself much more to straight 
cuts than curved ones (hence the letter U is often shaped as a V). With the upcoming of “soft writing” technics like pen 
and ink, on the other hand, it became easier to write curves 
and circles than straight lines, requiring the writer to have 
‘embodied’ the capacities and constraints of the new mate-
rial medium (Ihde 2010, 69–84).
Ihde (2010, 75) goes on to discuss the change toward 
the use of mechanical typewriters—and the controversies in 
philosophical writing with writers like Nietzsche embracing 
the new technology while others, like Heidegger, condemned 
its use claiming that “the word no longer passes through the 
hand, but becomes mechanized as pressure on the hand with 
the script ‘snatched’ from the hand”. Ihde aptly comments 
that Heidegger obviously never mastered the skill of type -
writing. This is more than a quip at Heidegger’s expense; it 
highlights that to write competently, one must develop bod-
ily skills that relate to the “capacities and constraints” (Ihde 
2010, 77) of the material technics and be responsive to the 
“latent telic inclinations” (Ihde 1979, 42) that make its use 
elegant or at least less cumbersome. Dominant stabilities, 
one may conclude, thus correspond to the materiality of the 
technics in some form.
More pertinent to my discussion of ChatGPT and Word’s 
Copilot, however, is Ihde’s analysis of writing with a word 
processor on a computer: “In the immediate use, the screen  
now becomes the tablet, first in glowing green letters, then 
amber, now the full color range. In the composition process 
the screen substitutes for paper.” (Ihde 2010, 76). What the 
screen offers in terms of capacities and constraints is that 
words can be just as easily produced as erased, i.e., typical 
word processors allow for constant re-writing and editing of 
what has already been written (Ihde 2010, 78).
It is noteworthy that, here, Ihde’s focus on materiality 
in embodied perception leads him to shift his attention to 
discussing screens, but not the writing applications that 
enable this constant re-writing and editing. It appears that 
‘material technics’ primarily implies something that can 
be touched or manipulated, not something informational 
like machine code, or the mathematics behind it. This also 
becomes evident in Ihde’s exchange with phenomenologist 
Andreas Kaminski: Ihde rejects Kaminski’s argument that, 
when Husserl describes Galileo’s mathematization of the 
lifeworld in his Crisis text, he discussed technology. Here, 
Ihde replies that for mathematics to become mediating tech-
nics, it would need to materialize in the form of Personal 
Computers and other devices and instruments (Ihde and 
Kaminski 2020, 275).
Still, Kaminski has a point in noting that we need to 
distinguish between different notions of materiality when 
it comes to digital technology (Ihde and Kaminski 2020, 
281). This is especially relevant regarding the multistability 
of computers, which transgresses many stabilities as they 
allow a range of completely different uses by simply switch-
ing to another application (i.e., different informational code).
AI & SOCIETY 
In Ihde’s (2010, 78) description, word processing appli-
cations offer what he calls a reading stability of a screen 
displaying paper which can be scrolled through, and he notes 
that the next application may display a movie or a whole new 
(virtual) world in a video game. In a rather quaint sounding 
formulation, he notes that, in the age of the internet,
“… the computer station is not simply that of a typing 
station – it is a locus where human and world interact 
globally … With the internet one could say the ‘screen 
speaks out to us’ just as we to the screen. It is the inter -
active interface where the cyberworld is mediated … 
We remain situated and embodied human beings and 
our locus of this experience is at our station … [T]he 
experiential locus remains the screen at the computer 
station which we occupy, although sometimes in our 
office, our home, or while away at hotel or university 
sub-stations.” (Ihde 2010, 80-81)
Ihde’s (2010, 83) lager point here is that despite our 
increasing interconnectedness and despite the compression 
of time and spatial distance through IT and the internet, 
humans remain embodied and situated. Therefore, the mate-
riality of digital technologies continues to play an important 
role.
3.2.2  (Quasi‑)materiality of digital writing technologies
While I share this commitment to an embodied perception 
stance in postphenomenology, Ihde’s conception of material-
ity raises issues. His focus on screens and keyboards (as the 
material technics that afford certain multistable relations) 
seems dysfunctional for analyzing digital technologies such 
as ChatGPT. This is because ChatGPT has not changed the 
screens, keyboards and computing devices in front of us; it 
runs on the same material technics we have used for years 
(Gerlek and Weydner-Volkmann 2025).
Still, using LLM apps profoundly changes the writing 
process. This makes it implausible to claim that an analysis 
of the multistabilities and mediating relations should focus 
on the material technics. Rather, it becomes clear that we 
also need to account for how different writing applications  
mediate the writing process differently. Hence, we also 
need to analyze how  applications present information on the 
screen, i.e., how certain aspects of applications have similar 
effects on multistability as materiality has.
One way to deal with this would be to move away from 
Ihde-style conceptions of materiality as Wellner (2020, 
110–111, 2023) does, at least in terms of hermeneutic rela-
tions with digital technologies (cf. also Kudina 2021). While 
this is a possible approach, it also implies a move away from 
Ihde’s decidedly embodied conception of intentionality (cf. 
Wellner 2020, 110–111). As will become evident in the next 
section, however, remaining committed to this conception grounds the connection between the materiality of technics 
and stable uses in terms of affordances. I therefore choose 
to forgo Wellner’s (2023) proposal to adopt a different onto-
logical stance.
Instead, Gerlek and Weydner-Volkmann ( 2025 ) have pro-
posed a “conceptual fix”: introducing quasi-materiality as 
an extension to Ihde’s conception of materiality can address 
the largely immaterial,  informational User Interface (UI) of 
digital applications like ChatGPT. The concept of quasi-
materiality denotes two core ideas: (1) that informational 
UIs allow embodied multistable human-technology rela-
tions in similar ways regarding embodied praxis that Ihde’s 
materiality of technics does; and (2) that we don’t mistake 
their informational status for actual materiality. We neither 
believe that our material devices have changed when an 
update to an app inevitably moves UI elements around; just 
as we don’t commonly mistake a natural feeling conversa-
tion with ChatGPT for an interaction with an actual person.
This conceptual fix allows overcoming some of the limi-
tations of an Ihde-style conception of materiality while 
retaining the strengths of Ihde’s embodied perception stance 
for digital technology. To be clear: when using ChatGPT, 
writing is still mediated through a screen, keyboard etc. and 
we remain situated and embodied human beings. Quasi-
material UIs are, thus, themselves mediated through the 
material technics we hold in our hands, sit in front of or 
type on with our fingers.
Quasi-materiality is not a new notion, however. At least 
implicitly,  it has been assumed in previous postphenomeno -
logical studies that immaterial UI elements can be treated 
as if they were material aspects of digital technology. For 
example, when Rosenberger (2009, 178) discusses embodi-
ment relations with a PC, he groups the mouse and keyboard 
with UI elements like “often-used onscreen icons or but-
tons”. But for apps like ChatGPT, introducing the explicit 
notion of quasi-materiality better captures the role UIs play 
when comparing different writing apps on the same material 
device. In turn, (quasi-)materiality offers the conceptual link 
between a technology’s affordances and the establishment 
of dominant stabilities. In the next section, I will discuss 
this link.
3.3  Connecting multistability with affordances
As mentioned above, retaining Ihde’s embodied perception 
stance in postphenomenology has the advantage of ground-
ing the link between multistabilities and a devices’ (quasi-)
material ‘capacities and constraints’ or ‘latent telic inclina-
tions’: it is because of these that some stabilities will turn 
out to become dominant while others don’t; they “predispose 
human beings to develop certain technolife forms over oth-
ers” (Mitcham 2006, 30). Or, as Ihde (1979, 48–49) puts it: 
These inclinations act as a “center of gravity which allows 
 AI & SOCIETY
a direction to be followed from the inclined possibility 
structure of technics.” Aagaard (2018) has shown that an 
adaptation of James Gibson’s concept of affordances cap-
tures this “magnetic” characteristic of certain stabilities in 
human–technology interaction very well.
Ihde’s embodied perception stance also grounds the link 
between a technic’s (quasi-)material latent telic inclinations 
and the establishment of bodily habits. As Rosenberger 
(2013) argues, already established bodily habits can provide 
“abstract relational strategies” in dealing with the require-
ments of new, unfamiliar technologies. De Boer (2023) 
extends Aagaard’s postphenomenological adaptation of 
affordances further:
“According to Gibson, not only the physical environ-
ment, but also social and cultural phenomena can be 
understood in terms of affordances. For example, a 
postbox affords the possibility to post a letter to a 
friend, or a composition by Bach affords to be played 
or listened to …” (De Boer 2023, 2270)
Hence, interpreting a specific stability in terms of affor -
dances allows us to better take the situational context into 
account: Which of the manifold affordances appear relevant 
to us depends not only on the (quasi-)material properties 
of a device and application, but also on the “norms and 
customs constituting what would be ‘adequate action’ in 
this environment” (De Boer 2023, 2272). A certain use of 
a technology becomes stable if it is afforded and fits the 
normative and social requirements of the situation. Neither 
a device’s material properties nor the context predetermine  
which affordances solicit action; but where (quasi-)mate-
rial properties of technologies optimally afford uses that are 
also socially adequate within a given situation, stabilities 
are likely to emerge in technological mediation (De Boer 
2023, 2274–2275). Consequently, they are also much more 
likely to become dominant stabilities, as more users can be 
expected to engage with the technology in such a stability.
This is a crucial point for my argument. My concern 
was that the use of LLM-based writing apps may under -
mine reflective writing by promoting commodification 
(cf. Sects.  2.1 and  2.2). While such tools are multistable  
in that some users may also find engaging uses that consti-
tute a focal practice, this doesn’t mean that the concern is 
unfounded; instead, the broader impact will depend on what 
stabilities will emerge as dominant (cf. Sect.  2.3). As we 
have seen in Sect.  3, this depends on the affordances of the 
writing tools. In turn, the affordances of these digital apps 
depend on (1) the capacities and constraints offered by the 
quasi-material properties of the app’s UIs and (2) on how 
socially adequate different uses are within a given situative 
context.
While affordances never predetermine technology use, 
an analysis of the “centers of gravity” offered by the UIs of LLM-based writing apps should therefore reveal in how far 
certain stabilities are likely or unlikely to become dominant . 
In turn, where dominant stabilities reflect commodified writ-
ing, it is reasonable to assume that these apps undermine 
reflective writing. In the next section, I will compare two 
different writing apps that make use of the same LLM (GTP-
4o) and analyze how their UIs promote commodification.
4  Comparing the affordances of ChatGPT 
and word co‑pilot
4.1  Preliminary methodological remarks
Since “postphenomenology is committed to the anti-essen-
tialism and non-foundationalism of American pragmatist 
thought, its claims cannot appeal to essences or foundations” 
(Rosenberger 2023, 2237). To make claims about dominant 
uses, one therefore needs to employ a cross-examination  
between different stabilities of using that technology (Rosen-
berger 2017, 491, 2023, 2237).
In the following, I will therefore start with comparing 
commodifying variants of using OpenAI’s ChatGPT with 
alternative, engaging variants of use. I will do so based on 
the affordances of its quasi-material UI within the context 
of academic writing. ChatGPT’s UI will, thus, be the “pivot 
point” of my analysis (Whyte 2015, 76), i.e., the aspect that 
remains the constant reference in my comparison; the two 
forms of stable uses are the “axes” (Rosenberger 2023, 2238) 
along which the comparison takes place. After that, I will do 
likewise with Microsoft’s Word Copilot. As both apps make 
use of the same underlying LLM (as of writing, GPT 4o), 
this will highlight the differences between the two apps in 
terms what their UIs afford. As will become clear, the two 
apps differ considerably in regards of affording reflective 
writing.
4.2  Communicative production of text: ChatGPT
ChatGPT (version October 2024) can be run as a stand-alone 
app, but on PCs, it is typically run through the browser. 
What we see in Fig.  1 on the left is the minimal UI users 
see when starting the app with some suggestions for using 
it. On the bottom of the window, we see a textbox labeled 
“message ChatGPT” that resembles a UI element known 
from various digital instant messaging apps. This design 
affords a conversational man–machine interaction: it affords 
natural feeling conversations with a quasi-other; and it does 
so by piggybacking on our established habits of electronic 
communication (Gerlek and Weydner-Volkmann 2025): we 
are expected to “chat” with the app.
For example, asking ChatGPT to explain Borgmann’s 
concept of commodification (Fig.  1, right) causes the app 
AI & SOCIETY 
to generate a corresponding answer. In follow-up questions, 
one can continue the conversation. As is well-known, Chat-
GPT can generate false statements, which is made explicit 
below the chat box. Still, in this stability, ChatGPT’s UI 
affords an alterity relation that enables, among other things, 
an academic conversation in natural language with a (some-
what unreliable) quasi-other.
This can be put to productive use in academic writing. 
For example, Szücs (2023) suggests that using ChatGPT 
as a conversational partner may help academic writers to 
clarify thoughts and offer them new forms of expression. 
What is afforded through ChatGPT’s UI as part of this stabil-
ity is a conversational process that can involve formulating 
one’s beliefs on a certain topic. As mentioned above, this is 
a crucial step in reflective thinking as envisioned in Dewey’s 
academic ethos. Here, the user formulates as if they would 
write a colleague via Signal or a similar electronic messen-
ger. While one “only” writes to a quasi-other, the conversa-
tional frame can help with the sometimes “painful” process 
of formulating one’s beliefs. While not a perfect match for 
academic writing, it is striking that in a meta-study on the 
impact of ChatGPT in education, conversational forms of 
use are typically mentioned in studies that report improved 
student engagement, also regarding constructs for critical 
thinking (Lo et al. 2024, 2, 9).
While the specific habits of students in ChatGPT use 
“remain inadequately addressed” in current research, nega-
tive impact on student engagement (including constructs 
for critical thinking) is strongly connected with a different form of use that in the educational context is associated 
with laziness, cheating and plagiarism, i.e., “copying and 
pasting text generated by ChatGPT” (Lo et al. 2024, 9–11). 
In academic writing, such well-afforded stabilities involve 
asking ChatGPT to generate a possible structure or even 
to write a first draft of an argument. Such interactions lose 
their conversational character, however, and resemble more 
traditional forms of human–computer interaction, such as 
typing a command. While one can use natural language, 
the output can be improved by carefully tuning the request 
(“prompt engineering”). Here, elements of an alterity rela-
tion are clearly retained, but the interaction strongly gains 
characteristics of a hermeneutic relation, as textual output 
is read and interpreted by us to learn something in relation 
to my request.
Irrespective of the quality of the resulting output, this 
constitutes a commodified form of text production: ChatGPT 
disburdens us not only from the skillful effort of writing 
clearly and coherently, but also from formulating our beliefs. 
Hence, the generated text doesn’t resemble our own pre-
judgments or prejudices, which is why this stability forgoes 
a meaningful engagement with them and relegates the writer 
to editing another’s writing (cf. Sect.  2.2). Therefore, such 
writing ceases to constitute reflective writing as envisioned 
in Dewey’s academic ethos.
At least in education, studies prominently report this 
form of use (Lo et al. 2024 , 9). Here, commodified text 
production seems to have become a dominant stability. On 
closer inspection, however, it seems not what ChatGPT 
Fig. 1  ChatGPT’s minimal user interface (left) and an example interaction (right)
 AI & SOCIETY
primarily was designed to afford. The primary form of 
interaction is geared toward leading a natural feeling 
conversation via messaging. Hence, my typing in the 
chat box that “I am currently writing a new philosophi-
cal article” leads to the reply “That’s great! What topic 
are you exploring in your philosophical article? I’d be 
happy to assist with ideas, structuring, research, or even 
refining your arguments.” – an invitation to the user to 
play along and interact with ChatGPT as a quasi-other. It 
therefore seems plausible to assume that forms of engag-
ing interaction for the purpose of reflective writing are 
another dominant stability afforded through the app’s 
quasi-material UI.
As mentioned in Sect.  3.3, affordances relate to the 
situative context as well. In academic writing, it is well-
known that commodified text generation conflicts with 
certain expectations around academic integrity and 
authorship (cf. the association with plagiarism in educa-
tion). At the same time, however, norms of academic pro -
ductivity (the “publish or perish” culture) give incentives 
to take ChatGPT up on its friendly offer to disburden us 
from the effort of writing. Since reflective thinking is by 
its very nature unsettling, this pressure is compounded. 
Lastly, since ChatGPT is mimicking not just any quasi-
other by default, but a helpful assistant, it becomes clear 
that engaging forms of use must be chosen very deliber -
ately. While well-afforded, it is a form of use that con -
stantly needs to resist the situational lure of the device 
paradigm and its ensuing commodification.4.3  Automated document production: Word Copilot
I now turn toward Microsoft’s Word Copilot (version 16.88). 
Currently, the LLM functionalities must be enabled sepa -
rately, incurring extra costs. Once it has been enabled, the 
blinking cursor is amended in the UI by a Copilot symbol 
to the left for any new paragraph and whenever existing text 
is selected; new documents present an invitation message 
to click this icon. This opens a dialog box (cf. Fig.  2, left). 
Here, users are asked to enter what they want to write about 
so that Copilot can create a draft “to help you get started”. 
For example, declaring that “I want to write an academic 
article on Albert Borgmann’s device paradigm and the use 
of Copilot in Word” the app drafts a structured argument 
straight into the document. Once this task has completed , 
the Copilot dialog offers to automatically change the gener -
ated text, suggesting to, “for example ‘make it formal’” (cf. 
Fig. 2, right) or to keep the draft.
The way Microsoft Word Copilot’s UI primarily affords 
use thus centers around automated document production. 
The resulting text does not need to be selectively copied and 
pasted into a draft document; instead, a full draft awaits the 
user to make edits directly within the word processor. The 
second dialog box and the icon remind users that Copilot 
can do parts of the editing automatically: highlighting any 
section in the document lets users choose to automatically 
“rewrite” this section. Inserting a new paragraph in an exist-
ing document allows, for example, to automatically “add a 
short paragraph on Borgmann’s life”.
Irrespective of the (often questionable) quality of the 
generated drafts, what the app’s UI affords is a highly 
Fig. 2  Word Copilot’s drafting interface (left) and sample of a user interaction (right)
AI & SOCIETY 
commodified form of writing. It is also important to note the 
subtle difference between ChatGPT’s requirement to copy 
text into a document opened in another word processor and 
Word Copilot’s generation of a fully formatted, “complete” 
draft document. While the former affords selective copying, 
the latter requires active deletion of those passages the users 
may want to write themselves or find unfitting.
The relegation of the users’ role into one of editing is, 
thus, considerably more pronounced in Word Copilot. In 
terms of capacities and constraints of the quasi-material UI, 
the interaction hardly invokes the users’ established habits 
of electronic communication and their respective relational 
strategies. The interaction has fewer characteristics of an 
alterity relation, where the user would constitute Word Copi-
lot as a conversational partner. Instead, the interaction is 
strongly geared toward writing commands (‘prompts’) and 
it seems forced to understand the produced document as 
a ‘reply’ that is part of a natural conversation. Rather, it 
appears as textual output that is then read, interpreted and 
edited, inclining the users toward a hermeneutic relation. 
Overall, we can observe that the dominant stability for using 
Word Copilot largely mediates writing in similar ways as 
“asking” ChatGPT for a draft: it affords a commodified 
writing process that ceases to constitute reflective writing  
as envisioned in Dewey’s academic ethos as it disengages 
us from formulating our own suggestions.Apart from the drafting interface of Word Copilot, a chat 
pane can be opened on the right-hand side of the app win-
dow via clicking on the Copilot icon in Word’s “ribbon” 
interface (cf. Fig.  3). This reveals a chat function, where 
users are informed that they can ask Copilot “anything 
about this document”. Through this part of the UI, the user 
is inclined to use Word Copilot in a similar communicative 
way, as described above for ChatGPT, i.e., leading natu-
ral feeling conversations with a quasi-other in an alterity 
relation. For example, users can task Copilot with posing 
questions that help structuring an outline and trying similar 
prompts as above for ChatGPT leads to similar results. Here, 
information can be selectively copied and pasted into the 
document. Through this pane, Word Copilot’s quasi-material 
UI therefore affords a stability for potentially engaging inter -
actions that facilitate reflective writing.
However, it is also clear that this is not the primary 
and intended use case: the users are invited to “ask ques-
tions about the document”, implying that a draft document 
already exists, and that the conversational interface is pri -
marily used to assist in editing or re-writing. While it is 
possible to use the chat pane in isolation from an existing 
draft by activating it in a blank document, the out of center 
positioning in the UI and the small writing incline the user 
to perceive this as a mere “aside” that complements the 
“main” interaction described earlier. Furthermore, once 
Fig. 3  Word Copilot’s chat pane

 AI & SOCIETY
a document is drafted, Word Copilot uses the content as 
additional context for generating responses in the chat 
pane. Thus, when I asked it to summarize my own answers 
about a possible structure that I entered in the chat pane, 
Word Copilot mixed in bits of content from the document 
that it had previously generated automatically.
Given that the app continues to highlight the automated 
drafting function, an engaging use of the app seems like 
an uphill battle. The latent telic inclinations present in its 
quasi-material UI require a highly deliberate resistance to 
the lure of the device paradigm: the user would need to 
fully focus on the communicative “aside” function to an 
otherwise empty document. This, of course, is exacerbated 
by the contextual factors of academic writing outlined 
above, especially regarding the publish or perish culture 
and its pressure to produce “academic output”. Therefore, 
it seems unlikely that deliberately using Word Copilot’s 
communicative interface to facilitate reflective writing will 
turn into a viable stability for many users and, hence, turn 
into a dominant stability.
4.4  Comparing ChatGPT and Word Copilot
As outlined above, the primary use afforded by ChatGPT 
is an open conversational interaction with a quasi-other. 
This stability may become dominant if users interact delib-
erately with it and resist the lure of the device paradigm.  
After all, transitioning to a stability of commodified text 
production is always just one interaction away.
While a commodifying use presents one of ChatGPT’s 
dominant stabilities, the capacities and the constraints of 
its UI hardly undermine a user’s deliberate choice to use 
it differently, i.e., in an engaging manner (even though its 
“eagerness” to assist must sometimes be resisted). The 
fact that ChatGPT’s output, but especially the user’s input 
needs to be (selectively) copied into another app creates a 
level of friction that underscores the qualitative differences 
regarding commodification to Word Copilots automatic 
document production.
While Word Copilot, in principle, allows a similar 
engaging use through its chat pane, the way the UI is 
designed makes this stability not well-afforded and disin-
cline the user from conversational interaction. Functions 
of automated document generation and even certain edit-
ing tasks are actively put in the center of the app window 
and advertised frequently. Even though both apps use the 
same underlying LLM, this makes it implausible to assume 
that engaging practices of reflective writing become a 
dominant stability with Word Copilot. Hence, with Copilot 
activated, reflective writing tasks requires users to resist 
to a considerably higher degree the lure toward commodi-
fied writing.5  Conclusions
Generative AI apps have the potential to negatively affect 
reflective thinking tasks by undermining reflective writ-
ing. This is because what makes writing so effective in 
facilitating reflective thinking is the latter’s need to lift our 
beliefs regarding a certain topic, our pre-judgments and 
prejudices, out of the stream of our thinking process and 
make them the thematic object of our attention. Writing 
these down disburdens us from holding them in a fixed 
state in memory. At the same time, however, it leaves the 
burden of formulation, of finding the right words, on the 
author. This is a crucial part in engaging with these sug-
gestions as outlined in Dewey’s academic ethos. However, 
generative AI tools promise to lift this burden from us as 
well, effectively relegating the users into the role of editing 
an existing draft.
As shown in Sect.  2, this can be interpreted as part 
of a larger societal pattern, where technical devices dis-
place activities that require effort but also give meaning 
by offering mere commodities. Thus, LLM-based writing 
tools promise to make our life easier by disburdening us 
from the time-consuming effort of formulating our beliefs. 
Ironically, however, by relegating users to an editing role, 
this disburdening stands in the way of engaging with what 
is meaningful in reflective writing, i.e., our own opinions, 
values, beliefs, or conceptions.
Based on a postphenomenological analysis of two LLM-
based tools that can be used in similar ways for academic 
writing, I have shown, that the prevalent focus on the 
technical functionalities of LLMs fails to make important 
distinctions. Both, ChatGPT and Microsoft Word Copilot 
use the same underlying LLM, but they mediate text pro-
duction differently due to how the UI structures the user 
interactions, and this also changes the likely dominance of 
commodifying stabilities. As part of the argument, three 
methodological revisions of Borgmann’s device paradigm 
and Ihde’s postphenomenology were necessary:
(1) Verbeek’s critique of Borgmann highlighted the 
necessity to take alternative, engaging stabilities into 
account, and, as Rosenberger argued, to analyze how 
likely it is that these stabilities become a dominant form 
of use.
(2) To answer this question, one must take contextual fac-
tors and UI design into account. Ihde has often men-
tioned how technologies offer ‘latent telic inclinations’ 
or ‘centers of gravity’. Based on the works of Aagaard, 
De Boer and Rosenberger, I have made use of a post-
phenomenological adaptation of Gibson’s affordances 
to prepare my comparative analysis of the two LLM-
based apps. This adaptation allows identifying contex-
AI & SOCIETY 
tual factors (situative norms of adequacy) as well as 
material factors in technology design to explain why 
certain stabilities become viable or even dominant and 
why others don’t.
(3) However, Ihde’s embodied perception stance poses 
problems for dealing with digital technologies: Ihde’s 
focus on the materiality of technics poses conceptual 
issues in regard of analyzing LLM-based apps that run 
on the same material devices we have used since long 
before ChatGPT became public. Following Gerlek and 
Weydner-Volkmann (2025), Ihde’s concept of material-
ity needs to be extended with the notion of quasi-mate-
riality. This captures how mostly immaterial, infor -
mational UI elements further shape the affordances of 
technology use, allowing for a cross-comparison of the 
affordances of different applications.
What can be taken away from this cross-comparison is 
that concerns of a substantially negative impact of LLM-
based writing tools on academic work are well-founded 
whenever those tools are used for reflective writing tasks. 
Both, situative norms of academic productivity as well as 
technology’s promise to disburden us from the effort and 
discomfort of formulating our own beliefs clearly incline 
writers toward commodifying forms of use, something that 
is well-afforded by both of the analyzed apps.
But I also showed that the UI design and its imple -
mentation of generative AI functionality has a significant 
impact on the relevant affordances. ChatGPT’s primary 
way of interaction affords “chatting” with a quasi-other. 
This can, alternatively, assist users in the crucial step of 
putting their premises, pre-judgments and prejudices into 
their own words and finding a way of expression as part 
of a conversational interaction. While Microsoft’s Word 
Copilot can in principle be used in a similar fashion, its 
affordances incline users toward commodifying forms of 
automated document production and make engaging con-
versations with a quasi-other unlikely to become a domi-
nant stability.
These implications for academic writing are part of a 
broader discussion on how the use of Big Data and AI 
technologies impact academic research (cf. Leonelli 2020). 
As I have shown, however, the discussion falls short when 
it is limited to whether generative AI should or shouldn’t 
be used in academic writing. But given that Word is one of 
the most prevalent writing tools in academic work, we can 
see clearly that choosing a writing app has ceased to be a 
matter of personal preferences. Instead, in light of Dewey’s 
academic ethos, it has become necessary to thoroughly 
reflect how our writing apps mediate reflective writing and 
thinking and choose accordingly.Author contribution S.W.V. is the sole author of this paper. While this 
paper concerns the use of LLMs, no generative AI tools were used in 
the writing of this manuscript.
Funding Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt 
DEAL.
Data availability No datasets were generated or analysed during the 
current study.
Declarations  
Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, 
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes 
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in 
the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a 
copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Aagaard J (2018) Magnetic and multistable: reinterpreting the affor -
dances of educational technology. Int J Educ Technol High Educ 
15(1):4. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1186/ s41239- 017- 0088-4
Aagaard J, Rosenberger R (2024) Experience without essentialism: on 
‘posting’ phenomenology. Qual Res Psychol. https:// doi. org/ 10.  
1080/ 14780 887. 2024. 23552 77
Arendt H (1999) Interviewing Hannah Arendt [Reconstructed Tran-
script of the O.R.T.F. Interview, aired on 06 July 1974] Inter -
view by Roger Errera. HannahArendt.Net 2(1). https:// doi. org/  
10. 57773/ hanet. v2i1. 190
Arendt, Hannah. 2003. Vita activa oder Vom tätigen Leben. 2. Aufl. 
Serie Piper 3623. Piper, München
Axtell G (2024) A Deweyan critique of the critical thinking versus 
character education debate. Philos Inquiry Educ 31(2):140–154
Borgmann A (1984) Technology and the character of contemporary 
life: a philosophical inquiry. University of Chicago Press, Chicago
Borgmann A (2005) Review of Peter-Paul-verbeek’s what things do: 
philosophical reflections on technology, agency, and design. Penn-
sylvania State University Press, University Park
De Boer B (2023) Explaining multistability: postphenomenology and 
affordances of technologies. AI Soc 38(6):2267–77. https://  doi. 
org/ 10. 1007/ s00146- 021- 01272-3
Dewey J (1978) (=MW6) The middle works volume 6: how we think 
and selected essays. 1910–1911. In: Jo Ann Boydston (ed) Car -
bondale (Ill.). Southern Illinois University Press
Dewey J (1985) (= MW9) The middle works volume 9: democracy 
and education. 1916. In: Jo Ann Boydston (ed) Carbondale (Ill.). 
Southern Illinois University Press
Gerlek Selin, Weydner-Volkmann Sebastian (2025) Materiality and 
machinic embodiment. A postphenomenological inquiry into 
ChatGPT’s active user interface. J Hum Technol Relations 3:1–15. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 59490/ jhtr. 2025.3. 7387
Hickman LA (2007) A Neo-Heideggerian critique of technology. In: 
Pragmatism as post-postmodernism. Lessons from John Dewey. 
 AI & SOCIETY
Fordham University Press, pp 92–111. https:// doi. org/ 10. 2307/j.  
ctvh4 zdh4. 10
Husserl E (1976) (=Hua III/1). Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie 
und phänomenologischen Philosophie. 1. Halbband. Edited by 
Karl Schuhmann. Nijhoff, Den Haag
Ihde D (1979) Technics and Praxis. Boston studies in the philosophy 
of science, vol 24. D. Reidel Pub. Co., Dordrecht
Ihde D (1990) Technology and the lifeworld: from garden to earth. 
Indiana University Press, Bloomington and Indianapolis
Ihde D (1999) Technology and prognostic predicaments. AI Soc 13(1–
2):44–51. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ BF012 05256
Ihde D (2002) Bodies in technology. Electronic mediations, vol 5. Uni-
versity of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis
Ihde D (2010) Embodied technics. S.l. Automatic Press, New York
Ihde D (2016) Husserl’s missing technologies. Perspectives in conti-
nental philosophy, 1st edn. Fordham University Press, New York
Ihde D (2022) Material hermeneutics: reversing the linguistic turn. 
Routledge, London and New York
Ihde D, Kaminski A (2020) What Is postphenomenological philosophy 
of technology? In: Friedrich A, Gehring P, Hubig C, Kaminski 
A, Nordmann A (eds) Jahrbu.ch Technikphilosophie Autonomie 
Und Unheimlichkeit. Nomos, Bengaluru, pp 259–88. https:// doi.  
org/ 10. 5771/ 97837 48904 861- 259
Kegan R (1994) In over our heads: the mental demands of modern life. 
Harvard University Press, Cambridge
Kudina O (2021) ‘Alexa, Who Am I?’: voice assistants and hermeneu-
tic lemniscate as the technologically mediated sense-making. Hum 
Stud 44(2):233–253. https://  doi. org/ 10. 1007/  s10746-  021- 09572-9
Laaksoharju M, Lennerfors TT, Persson A, Oestreicher L (2023) “What 
is the problem to which AI Chatbots are the solution? AI eth-
ics through Don Ihde’s embodiment, hermeneutic, alterity, and 
background relationships. In: Ethics and sustainability in digital 
cultures. Routledge
Leonelli S (2020) Scientific research and big data. In: Zalta EN (eds) 
The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2020 Edi-
tion). https:// plato. stanf  ord. edu/ archi ves/ sum20 20/ entri es/ scien  
ce- big- data/
Lo CK, Hew KF, Jong M-Y (2024) The influence of ChatGPT on stu-
dent engagement: a systematic review and future research agenda. 
Comput Educ 219:105100. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. compe du.  
2024. 105100
Milano S, McGrane JA, Leonelli S (2023) Large language models chal-
lenge the future of higher education. Nat Mach Intell 5(4):333–
334. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ s42256- 023- 00644-2
Mitcham Carl (2006) From phenomenology to pragmatism: using tech -
nology as an instrument. In: Selinger E (ed) Postphenomenology: 
a critical companion to Ihde. SUNY series in the philosophy of 
the social sciences. State University of New York Press, Albany, 
pp 21–33Mykhailov D (2020) The phenomenological roots of technological 
intentionality: a postphenomenological perspective
Orland K (2023) These AI-generated news anchors are freaking me out. 
Ars Technica (blog). December 15, 2023. https:// arste chnica. com/  
ai/ 2023/ 12/ these- ai- gener  ated- news- ancho rs- are- freak ing- me- out/
Rodgers C (2002) Defining reflection: another look at John Dewey 
and Reflective thinking. Teach Coll Record Voice Scholar Educ 
104(4):842–866. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ 1467- 9620. 00181
Rosenberger R (2009) The sudden experience of the computer. AI Soc 
24(2):173–180. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s00146- 009- 0190-9
Rosenberger R (2013) The importance of generalized bodily habits for 
a future world of ubiquitous computing. AI & Soc 28(3):289–296
Rosenberger R (2017) Notes on a nonfoundational phenomenology of 
technology. Found Sci 22(3):471–494. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/  
s10699- 015- 9480-5
Rosenberger R (2023) On variational cross-examination: a method for 
postphenomenological multistability. AI Soc 38(6):2229–2242. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s00146- 020- 01050-7
Rosenberger R, Verbeek P-P (2017) A Field Guide to Postephenom-
enology. In: Rosenberger R, Verbeek P-P (eds) Postphenomeno-
logical investigations: essays on human-technology relations. 
Lexington Books, Lanham, pp 9–41
Szücs B (2023) Not replacing but enhancing: using ChatGPT for 
academic writing. The Times Higher Education. June 14, 2023. 
https:// www. times highe reduc ation. com/ campus/ not- repla cing-  
enhan cing- using- chatg pt- acade mic- writi ng
Verbeek P-P (2005) What things do: philosophical reflections on tech-
nology, agency, and design. Penn State University Press, Univer -
sity Park. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1515/ 97802 71033 228
Wellner G (2020) The multiplicity of multistabilities: turning multista-
bility into a multistable concept. In: Miller G, Shew A (eds) Reim-
agining philosophy and technology, reinventing Ihde. Philosophy 
of engineering and technology, vol 33. Springer, Cham, pp 105–22
Wellner G (2023) Material hermeneutic of digital technologies in the 
age of AI. AI Soc 38(6):2159–2166. https://  doi. org/ 10. 1007/  
s00146- 020- 00952-w
Whyte KP (2015) What is multistability? A theory of the keystone 
concept of postphenomenological research. In: Technoscience and 
postphenomenology: the Manhattan papers. Lexington Books, pp 
69–81
Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
