Vol.:(0123456789)Education and Information Technologies
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10639-025-13497-6
MANUSCRIPT
AI‑enabled networked learning: A posthuman connectivist 
approach in an English for specific purposes classroom
Humaira Mariyam B.1  · V. K. Karthika1 
Received: 29 May 2024 / Accepted: 14 March 2025 
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 
2025
Abstract
This study investigates the efficacy of artificial intelligence in facilitating networked 
learning that aids educators in creating inclusive and academically responsible 
learning environments in Indian English for Specific Purposes (ESP) classrooms. 
Designed as a qualitative case study, the intervention involves twenty participants 
from an engineering institute in India, who engaged with AI and chatbots in pairs to 
learn and build on their content knowledge on sustainable practices in engineering. 
The theoretical foundation for the study is grounded in Vygotsky’s Zone of Proximal 
Development (ZPD) model and the theory of Connectivism, both of which were uti-
lised for an in-depth data analysis. This exploration posits that the process of learn-
ing involves connecting various information sources and the ability to make connec-
tions between and across discourses, concepts, fields and experiences. Therefore, the 
non-linearity in learning involving human, non-human and technological resources 
is analysed through the connectivism theory (Siemens, 2005a, b & Downes, 2005a, 
b). The findings of the study discuss the pedagogical implications of incorporating 
AI and chatbots among tertiary-level learners and examine the ethical and social 
consequences of accommodating them in the learning assemblage. The results of the 
study will also enable educators to formulate strategies to include AI in teaching and 
learning methods through the affordances of connectivism.
Keywords Artificial intelligence · Zone of proximal development · Connectivism · 
Higher education · English language learning · Large language models
 * Humaira Mariyam B. 
 humairamariyam.nitt@gmail.com; humairamariyam1606@gmail.com
 V. K. Karthika 
 karthika.leedsuniversity@gmail.com; vkkarthika@nitt.edu
1 Department of Humanities and Social Sciences, National Institute of Technology, 
Tiruchirappalli (NIT-T), Tiruchirappalli, India
 Education and Information Technologies
1 Introduction
The technological advancements over the years have impacted and shaped educa-
tional practices, particularly in language learning. The integrated approaches to 
language and technology such as Computer-Assisted Language Learning (CALL) 
and Mobile-Assisted Language Learning (MALL) have demonstrated how digital 
tools can enhance learning outcomes (Davies et  al., 2013; Dudeney & Hockly, 
2012). Higher education institutions recommend using technologies such as arti-
ficial intelligence (AI) to create an interactive learning experience (Adu et  al., 
2022).
More recently, the proliferation of Large Language Models (LLMs) such as 
ChatGPT (Chat Generative Pre-trained Transformer), Gemini, LLaMA (Large 
Language Model Meta AI), Language Translation, and many others, which can 
generate texts that are human-like and answer questions with great level of accu-
racy, has given rise to a potential interest in exploring its application in the field 
of education.
LLMs such as ChatGPT and Gemini have tremendously impacted educational 
practices. Studies reveal that LLMs develop English language skills (Wang & 
Guo, 2023), facilitate personalised learning (Tlili et al., 2023), provide feedback 
(Kohnke et al., 2023) and motivate the learners (Ali et al., 2023). LLMs can also 
take up roles of being assistants, material generators, assessors and interlocutors 
(Jeon & Lee, 2023). However, it also poses negative impacts. For instance, an 
increasing number of colleges and institutions are open to returning to the more 
conventional pen-and-paper evaluation forms in response to the increased risk 
of unethical behaviour (Tlili et al., 2023). Academic disintegrity is not a novel 
issue; it has existed in educational institutions where learners find ways to gain 
an unfair advantage over others in the classroom (Adeshola & Adepoju, 2023; 
Rowe, 2004). However, recent technological advancements such as ChatGPT and 
Gemini have raised serious concerns about academic dishonesty (Pavlik, 2023). 
Similarly, despite plagiarism being an existing problem, scholars point out that 
ChatGPT and other such LLMs raise worries about academic integrity and add 
a new dimension to the risks of cheating and plagiarising (Kostka & Toncelli, 
2023; Cotton et  al., 2024). Studies also assert that using AI may hinder learn-
ers’ improvement of writing skills, critical thinking and problem-solving abilities 
(Susnjak & McIntosh, 2024). The adverse effects of AI in academia are not just 
limited to dishonesty and have the potential to have an overall negative impact on 
learning and the education system (Adeshola & Adepoju, 2023).
While many studies have suggested ways to address the challenges posed by 
AI tools, such as implementing advanced plagiarism detection tools or redesign-
ing assessment methods, there remains a significant gap in understanding how 
to integrate ChatGPT into the learning process effectively, ensuring its respon-
sible and ethical use (Rahman & Watanobe, 2023). Although some research 
offers preliminary suggestions, the practical implementation and applicability of 
these strategies in real educational settings remain unclear. In response to these 
Education and Information Technologies 
growing concerns, Hockly (2023), in his study, asserts the need for improvement 
in the digital competencies and strategies to utilise AI and technology responsibly 
in a classroom space that is ethical and pedagogically beneficial. Digital compe-
tencies encompass not only technical proficiency in operating digital devices but 
also the social and emotional dimensions of utilising and comprehending them 
(Zhao et al., 2021). Therefore, to effectively and responsibly interact with LLMs 
for learning purposes, proficiency in engaging with the tool’s interface, as well 
as a comprehensive understanding of its capabilities and limitations, become a 
prerequisite. Additionally, it requires the learners to be cognizant of ethical con-
siderations, including issues of bias and privacy (Adeshola & Adepoju, 2023). 
Consequently, individuals with limited digital competence may struggle to use 
ChatGPT effectively, potentially overlooking critical aspects of its responsible 
application.
Therefore, research on LLMs in education has primarily focussed on their poten-
tial for enhancing learning and the associated risks, including plagiarism and over-
reliance. While some studies mention the need for digital literacy (Hockly, 2023), 
practical suggestions as to how educators can systematically implement responsi-
ble use of AI in classrooms are limited. Furthermore, existing frameworks for AI 
integration often neglect the connectivist perspective, which emphasises learn-
ing through networks, shared knowledge, and active participation in digital envi-
ronments. This paper seeks to address this gap by documenting the affordances of 
LLMs through an intervention that would aid educationists in formulating strategies 
for the responsible and effective use of AI in education. This study also explores the 
possibility of new teaching and learning methods in an ESP classroom that incorpo-
rate AI and LLMs from the perspective of Vygotsky’s More Knowledgeable Other 
(MKO) and posthuman connectivist approach.
The theory of Vygotsky places a strong emphasis on learning through social 
interaction, interpersonal communication and collaboration with the help of an 
MKO. Therefore, analysing LLMs as MKO in providing support and assistance to 
learners in this study can expose their affordances in the learning process. This is 
particularly beneficial in the context where learners have different learning needs 
and styles and may require additional assistance. Similarly, the theory of connec-
tivism developed by Siemens (2005a, b) and Downes (2005a, b) emphasises the 
significance of networks and connections in the learning process. As we live in 
posthuman times where technology is constantly evolving and challenging the 
agency of humans, in the field of education, connectivism as a learning theory 
can provide a framework for understanding the complexities involved in learning 
by acknowledging the potential of networks and technology (Omodan, 2023). A 
networked education system/learning process is rooted in a decentralised, non-
hierarchical, and multi-directional infrastructure (Castells, 2000). This approach 
underscores how technology and humans are interconnected. As LLMs provide 
access to information and collaborate with the learners in their learning process, 
they can break down barriers and promote inclusivity.
Therefore, by combining connectivism with Vygotsky’s MKO, this qualitative 
case study explores how LLMs can be used to create a more inclusive and respon-
sible learning environment. It examines the efficacy of LLMs and AI chatbots as 
 Education and Information Technologies
pedagogical tools in an English for Specific Purposes (ESP) classroom in South 
India. The study also aims to illustrate the non-linear and networked learning 
involving human, non-human and technological resources from a posthuman theo-
retical perspective.
2  LLMs in language learning and education
LLMs such as ChatGPT and Gemini can facilitate personalised and effective learn-
ing experiences (Kasneci et  al., 2023; Tlili et  al., 2023) and provide interactive 
feedback (Kohnke et al., 2023). Various studies assert that LLMs can improve Eng-
lish language skills such as reading (Ali et  al., 2023), grammar and vocabulary 
(Wang & Guo, 2023), and writing skills marked by improved content and organi-
zational structure (Allagui, 2023; Fitria, 2023). Using LLMs can have a positive 
impact on the motivation level of the learners to develop their language skills. For 
instance, Ali et al. (2023) explored the influence of LLMs in improving the moti-
vational aspects of the learners and found that learners were motivated to enhance 
their reading and writing skills. This could also be because of the personalised 
inputs and feedback provided by the chatbots (Kohnke et al., 2023). Similarly, Jeon 
and Lee (2023) investigated the role of ChatGPT and affirmed that LLMs can play 
four roles in the learning process, including being a teaching assistant, material 
generator, assessor and interlocutor.
At the higher education level, LLMs can enhance critical thinking and problem-
solving skills and encourage the development of research skills (Kasneci et al., 2023). 
However, very few empirical research studies support this claim. It has been reported 
that students will require digital/AI literacy skills to comprehend humans and machines 
(Long & Magerko, 2020) and prepare for a future with rapid technological advance-
ments. Additionally, there are also other pressing concerns regarding the use of LLMs 
in education. For instance, Chomsky refers to LLMs as ‘high-tech plagiarism’ (Stewart, 
2023), which adds a new dimension to the already existing issues related to unethical 
practices and plagiarism (Kostka & Toncelli, 2023; Cotton et al., 2024). Sullivan et al. 
(2023) state that despite the positive impacts of LLMs in education, academic integrity 
was a common concern in most studies. This adds to the claims that motivation to cheat 
during assessments and academic submissions becomes higher due to the accessibil-
ity and ease that AI and LLMs offer (Kostka & Toncelli, 2023). Similarly, LLMs may 
provide the users with false information that can be stereotypical and inaccurate, which 
requires the learners to critically evaluate the data (Heaven, 2023). This study adds to 
the literature by documenting the impact of LLMs as pedagogical tools in a language 
classroom in developing the content knowledge of the learners that would require them 
to operationalize their critical thinking and research skills. It also explores the possibil-
ity of creating inclusive and academically responsible learning environments by incor -
porating technology, especially LLMs, which has not been investigated before.
Education and Information Technologies 
3  Research questions
The study focuses on the effectiveness of using Large Language Models (LLMs) 
and AI Chatbots in an English language classroom and aims to explore the following 
research questions:
1) How do LLMs and AI chatbots support learners and educators in creating inclu-
sive and academically responsible learning environments in an English for Spe-
cific Purposes (ESP) classroom?
2) What are the pedagogical implications of accommodating LLMs and AI Chatbots 
in developing the content knowledge of the learners?
4  Theoretical framework
This study is placed within a framework comprising two major theories. Firstly, the 
theory of Connectivism, which has emerged as a response to the evolving terrain of 
education in the digital age where learning is no longer an individualistic activity, 
highlights the importance of technological tools and social networks in the learning 
process. Developed by Siemens (2005a, b) and Downes (2005a, b), it emphasises 
the significance of networks and connections in the learning process. In other words, 
it asserts that learning occurs through the process of connecting various informa-
tion sources, establishing connections between humans and humans and technology. 
The principles of connectivism (Fig.  1) suggest that learning rests in a diversity of 
thoughts and may also reside in non-human appliances. It asserts that the ability to 
draw connections between fields, ideas and concepts and the potential to know more 
is crucial than what is already known. The theory also propounds that maintaining 
and nurturing connections to promote continual learning is important to have up-to-
date knowledge, and the learners can choose what to learn. Therefore, while other 
language theories such as cognitivism, behaviourism and constructivism emphasise 
the individual’s independent learning experience, this theory underscores the con-
nected learning experiences of individuals (Jung, 2019), which aligns more with the 
sociocultural theory of learning espoused by Vygotsky.
Many studies exploring technology and online communications in learning 
have employed connectivism theory to examine how the connections between 
learners, technology, and online and offline communications increase connectivist 
knowledge, reflection, and negotiation (Liu et al., 2023; Sozudogru et al., 2019; 
Su et al., 2023). Social and technological networks are increasingly being used to 
foster learner connections. Aksal et al. (2013) applied connectivism principles on 
Facebook in a 16-week qualitative study, highlighting its role in facilitating learn-
ing and developing leadership, decision-making, and critical reflection. Similarly, 
Wang et  al. (2018) explored connectivism in a 36-week MOOC, emphasising 
how different online platforms enabled knowledge sharing and varying degrees of 
learner connectivity. With regards to professional development, Davoodi (2024) 
asserts that connectivism fosters dynamic knowledge networks, enabling a shift 
 Education and Information Technologies
in educators’ perceptions of AI from apprehension to empowerment. However, 
when it comes to GenAI tools such as LLMs, their role in fostering connectiv -
ist learning is still evolving. While studies applying connectivism theory to AI 
tools such as ChatGPT are limited, one notable study by Liang and Bai (2024) 
examines how GenAI tools support learning in social entrepreneurship education 
by fostering collaborative learning, knowledge connectivity, and theory–prac-
tice integration through networked interactions. Advancing the discussion in this 
emerging field, this study adopts connectivism as a theoretical framework. Given 
the complex and interconnected nature of AI tools such as ChatGPT in learn-
ing environments, Connectivism serves as an ideal theoretical framework for 
this study. As a theory that emphasises knowledge acquisition through networks 
of human and technological interactions, Connectivism aligns with the study’s 
focus on using LLMs to enhance learners’ content knowledge while promoting its 
responsible use.
Fig. 1  Principles of connectivism
Education and Information Technologies 
In the current scenario, where the individualistic agency of humanism is 
questioned, teaching and learning are no longer an encounter between two or 
more humans. It involves various other factors such as technology, to start with. 
Omodan (2023) argued that in posthuman times, where technology is constantly 
evolving and challenging the agency of humans, connectivism as a learning the-
ory can provide a framework to understand the complexities involved in learning 
by acknowledging the potential of networks and technology.
The posthuman approach recognizes the significance of technology in the every -
day assemblage (Buchanan-Oliver, 2015), foregrounds the interconnectedness of all 
things (Hasse, 2022) and rejects the binary between the human and the non-human. 
In other words, posthumanism debunks hierarchy and affirms that everything 
(human, non-human, machine, ideas, etc.) is relational and connected. A posthuman 
classroom, therefore, integrates technology as a medium more than a mere tool in 
all aspects of learning. It facilitates multiplicity in learning, that is, multiple ways 
of accessing and interacting with information inside and outside the confines of the 
classroom. Hence, the theory of connectivism parallels the theory of posthumanism 
by asserting the non-binary relation between humans and machines and accounts for 
their interaction with each other to learn and create knowledge. See (Fig.  2) to per -
ceive the connections between the two theories.
The second theory used in this study is Vygotsky’s Zone of Proximal Develop-
ment (ZPD), which is a part of his socio-cultural theory (Vygotsky, 1978). Accord-
ing to Vygotsky, the ZPD is the difference between the current development level 
of the learner and the potential development of the learners, which can be attained 
through the mediation of a More Knowledgeable Other (MKO). This theory places 
a strong emphasis on learning through social interaction, interpersonal communi-
cation and collaboration with the help of an MKO. MKOs here not just refer to a 
teacher in a classroom but can be mentors, peers, books, technology, environment, 
etc. Therefore, analysing LLMs as one of the MKOs in providing support and assis-
tance to learners in this study can expose their affordances in the learning process. 
This is particularly beneficial in the context where learners have different learning 
Fig. 2  Connections between connectivism and posthumanism
 Education and Information Technologies
needs and styles and may require additional assistance. This study also explores the 
various MKOs such as LLMs, peers, and researchers, and their connected media-
tion in the learning process through the intervention of the study. Similarly, from the 
perspective of connectivism, which underscores the interconnectedness of humans 
and technology, this study investigates new ways of learning that are influenced by 
and accommodate LLMs for an inclusive education. Therefore, this study is built 
on the theory of connectivism and Vygotsky’s ZPD model to explore LLMs and AI 
chatbots in an ESP classroom and illustrate the networked learning essential for an 
inclusive education in posthuman times.
5  Methodology
5.1  Design
This study aims to document the experience, perceptions and reflections of the learn-
ers by adopting a case study methodology. The case study relies on thick descrip-
tions to gather in-depth and detailed information, adding multiple dimensions to the 
research (Zainal, 2007), which also aligns with the theory of posthumanism and con-
nectivism. These theories acknowledge the diversity of opinions and encourage the 
exploration of non-linear connections and relations between human and non-human. 
The comprehensive qualitative data produced through the case study will explain the 
complexities of the learning process, which is networked, non-linear, hybrid, multi-
ple and relational. Therefore, this case study documents a specific teaching–learning 
episode involving LLMs, which warrants further pedagogical considerations.
The study was ethically approved by the host university, and the participants 
agreed to voluntarily participate in the study after being informed of the purpose of 
the study, the duration, and the procedures, which involved screen-recording their 
laptops, audio-recording the interviews and discussions, and taking pictures for 
documentation.
5.2  Participants
Engineering students from an institute of national importance were the partici-
pants of this case study. Twenty students from first-year Mechanical Engineering 
were chosen for the study among the thirty volunteers. These twenty participants 
were selected as per their explorations and considerable use of LLMs for both per -
sonal and professional use. To enhance the relevance of the data (Bock & Sergeant, 
2002), a purposive sampling method was employed to select the participants. The 
initial screening of the participants was carried out based on their perspectives on 
and familiarity with the LLMs, which they demonstrated through their answers to 
the question “Produce a report on the impact of Chat GPT in education by criti-
cally assessing the potential advantages and disadvantages that may arise” in their 
end-semester examination. The criteria for selection included their ability to articu-
late the advantages and challenges of using LLMs and their demonstrated interest 
Education and Information Technologies 
in AI-assisted learning. Forty-five participants were screened through this process, 
out of which thirty volunteered to participate in the study. Finally, twenty students 
were selected based on the background discussion, which was conducted to further 
assess their familiarity with LLMs and their prior experiences with AI-driven tools. 
It was also based on their engagement and expressed willingness to critically reflect 
on AI-assisted learning. The participants and setting of the study were chosen pri-
marily out of convenience and to ensure efficacy, as both the first author (also the 
researcher) and the second author are affiliated with the same institute. The chosen 
sample for the study is representative of a diverse group of learners as the institute 
attracts students from various regions, linguistic backgrounds and academic dis-
ciplines across the country. This diversity makes the study suitable for examining 
LLMs in inclusive education. The participants included thirteen males and seven 
females belonging to the age group of 17–19.
Additionally, the focus of this case study is on the perceptions and experiences of 
the learners in using LLMs in the educational setting instead of analysing specific 
behavioural outcomes. While socio-cultural and economic backgrounds may influ-
ence learning experiences in broader contexts, this study did not explicitly analyse 
their impact. However, prior research suggests that learners’ engagement with LLMs 
is primarily shaped by their digital literacy and familiarity with AI tools (Bender, 
2024). Therefore, there is scope for future research that could explore how demo-
graphic variables mediate LLM interactions.
5.3  Setting
All the engineering students at the institute are offered ‘English for Communica-
tion’ as a compulsory course in the first year of their engineering program. This 
course, which aims to develop the learners’ professional communication skills, also 
strives to create a responsible and inclusive environment for them where they can 
exercise autonomy and critical thinking abilities. The course caters to building their 
content knowledge through inquiry-based learning along with a focus on the LSRW 
skills. Hence, the study is relevant to the learners as it concerns the development of 
Fig. 3  Data collection instruments
 Education and Information Technologies
language skills as well as the content knowledge of the learners through the inter -
vention of the LLMs.
5.4  Instruments
This study used the following instruments for data collection, as shown in Fig. 3.
The audio-recorded discussions were an attempt to capture the participants’ spon-
taneous responses as they worked, the challenges they faced and strategies they 
used. Similarly, the participants’ interactions with LLMs were gathered through 
screen-recording while they worked on the assigned task. The recorded data helped 
in providing insights into their engagement patterns, tool dependency and connected 
learning. The semi-structured interviews were conducted at the end of the study with 
each participant to understand the overall learning experience. The questions for the 
interview included how LLMs influenced their learning and writing processes, how 
they approached their task, and what method they followed. Additionally, the reflec-
tion reports submitted by the participants were written reflections detailing specific 
aspects of their interactions with LLMs, which included identifying biases, cred-
ibility of the information provided, and redundancy. Finally, the learners’ composi-
tions were used to examine their writing proficiency and their ability to exhibit their 
content knowledge effectively.
5.5  Procedure
The study was conducted in 2024 for six weeks and incorporated three phases: back -
ground study, intervention and interviews.
5.5.1  Background study
In the initial phase, a background study was conducted to understand the learners’ 
familiarity and already-formed perspectives about LLMs. These semi-formal pre-
liminary discussions were audio-recorded for further deliberations. Additionally, 
during this session, the learners’ proficiency in interacting with LLMs and employ -
ing pertinent keywords and phrases to retrieve the relevant information was also 
explored. Further, a Google form was circulated to gather the participant’s details as 
a part of the background study.
5.5.2  Intervention
The intervention of the study required the learners to do a project in pairs. They 
were given a prompt in the initial stage of the intervention- “Choose a theme to work 
under, which falls at the intersection of sustainability and engineering”. Therefore, 
the learners in pairs chose ‘Design for Sustainability’ and ‘Energy Efficiency and 
Resource Conservation’ as themes to work under. The project comprised a struc-
tured framework with learners brainstorming ideas individually and collaboratively 
Education and Information Technologies 
in pairs and generating potential directions of inquiry. Then, the learners used LLMs 
as the primary means of further exploration into the subject matter, using digital 
resources to improve their understanding of the subject. During this exploration, 
the learners analyzed the content produced by LLMs, examined the acquired infor -
mation, used various other online platforms to verify and learn more about them, 
identified patterns and made meaningful connections from the various sources of 
information. Throughout the process, learners also peer-reviewed each other’s tra-
jectories, exchanged feedback, collectively reflected on the ideas, and discussed 
them with the researcher as they deemed fit. Consequently, the laptops of the learn-
ers were screen-recorded to map the learning process by analyzing the kinds of 
prompts, keywords, and the various sources used by the learners during the project. 
Below is Fig.  4, which shows a visual representation of networked learning upon 
scanning. The screenshots are representative of the numerous trajectories advancing 
throughout the intervention.
5.5.3  Learner’s composition and interviews
In the final phase of the study, the learners produced a report/review article on 
Design and Sustainability and Energy Efficiency and Resource Conservation. The 
outcome of the project was to produce a thorough report, as report writing within 
the purview of the ‘English for Communication’ course curriculum was essential. 
This task was strategically created to equip the learners with the skills and abili-
ties requisite for crafting comprehensive and professional reports. Following this, 
one-on-one interviews were conducted to document the takeaways, experiences, and 
challenges of the learners throughout the study. The audio recordings of the inter -
views were transcribed for further analysis. The front page of the learners’ composi-
tion after the completion of the project is available in the Appendix.
Fig. 4  Video representing con-
nected learning

 Education and Information Technologies
6  Data analysis
The collected data through audio recordings were transcribed verbatim and 
reviewed. The screen-recordings were analysed to look for their learning patterns, 
tool dependency and connected learning. To analyse the data thematically, a com-
bination of inductive and deductive coding was used where some predefined codes 
were applied based on the existing literature concerning LLMs and the aim of this 
study, such as digital literacy, ethical issues, and biases; other emergent codes were 
identified during the analysis, such as collaborative learning and perceptions of 
AI. Consequently, these coded data were grouped within broader themes, connect-
ing with the two theories, which are discussed further to elucidate the spectrum of 
potential trajectories that may help in exploring and answering the research ques-
tions. Additionally, the reliability of the data analysis was ensured by having the 
second author review the data analysis.
Therefore, all the themes that emerged during the analysis have been categorised 
and presented under two major subheadings (6.1 & 6.2), each corresponding directly 
to the key theoretical frameworks used in this study. Specifically, these two subhead-
ings reflect the conceptual lens of Vygotsky’s More Knowledgeable Other (MKO) 
and Connectivism, framing the discussion around LLMs as MKOs and LLMs as 
promoters of networked learning. Finally, the analyses within these theoretical 
themes are summarised in the findings section.
6.1  LLMs as MKO in the learning assemblage
More Knowledgeable Other (MKO) leads the learners from their current zone of 
development to the zone of proximal development (ZPD) through scaffolding. 
The ZPD model originates from Vygotsky’s sociocultural theory (Vygotsky, 1987, 
1978), which refers to a space where the learner is involved in tasks that require 
guidance from an expert/MKO. This would help the learner improve their potentiali-
ties and expand their current zone of development. MKOs, traditionally perceived as 
teachers/mentors, can also be other human-nonhuman aspects such as the internet, 
books, peers, environment, etc. In this study, LLMs also worked as MKOs, enabling 
the learners to expand their current zone of learning by facilitating personalised 
learning, encouraging collaboration and improving their English language skills, 
which are discussed further.
6.1.1  Facilitating personalised learning
Personalised learning enables the learners to receive, access content and learn 
concepts that are tailored to their specific needs (Wang, 2023). However, in the 
tremendously entangled learning assemblage, all the factors collaboratively influence 
the content and structure of the learning environment with their varying degrees of 
agency. In this regard, LLMs serve as dynamic and personalised spaces that prompt 
learners to think, act and interact. For instance, the learners shared that they use 
LLMs to simplify any complex concept while learning, using prompts such as ‘Can 
Education and Information Technologies 
you explain the concept of thermodynamics as if you were explaining to a 12-year-
old child?’ and ‘What is feminism in layman’s terms?’ (RD). The learners also shared 
that they use LLMs to complete their assignments and get feedback from them in 
terms of language and structure to produce a ‘polished academic essay’. It was noted 
that LLMs facilitate personalised learning by enabling the learners to revise their 
writing based on its feedback. For instance, one of the participants mentioned, ‘I 
realised I could ask the tool to help me with adjusting the tone of my writing, which 
was something I struggled with before.’ Therefore, LLMs can take up the role of an 
MKO in a learning assemblage by helping the learners with scaffolding and expanding 
their current developmental zones, as they answer questions with detailed information, 
provide relevant feedback, aid the learners with their writing skills, and also keep them 
motivated. This personalised learning space promotes inclusivity in the classroom as 
LLMs as a medium can serve as an MKO to learners of any level (Fig. 5 ).
These results are not the outcome of a simple cause-effect relationship between 
humans and LLMs alone. From a posthuman perspective, it becomes imperative to 
look at all the possible factors contributing to the learning process. Learning, there-
fore, should be understood as “complex relationships among learners, teachers, con-
tent, and technology within particular social and cultural contexts” (Kern, 2006, p. 
201), enabling collaboration.
6.1.2  Encouraging collaborative learning
Though the intervention required the learners to work in pairs for their project, the 
observation and results of the project gave significant insights concerning the importance 
of collaboration and having multiple sources of MKOs in learning. Collaboration in 
this context occurred between learner and LLMs, learner and peers, and learner and 
researcher, where LLMs, peers and the researcher were the MKOs, facilitating the 
learning process. While LLMs, with their human-like interaction, can collaborate 
with learners on many levels, such as by giving relevant information and feedback and 
assisting in generating ideas, they may also be a cause for distraction with their excessive 
source of information. This creates a space for connected collaboration where every 
factor in the learning assemblage contributes to the learning process (Fig. 6 ).
Fig. 5  LLMs working as MKOs
 Education and Information Technologies
Similarly, teachers as MKOs can guide the learners in mastering a subject or a concept 
but may be of limited help if it is outside the scope of their expertise. However, they could 
give inputs based on their lived experiences that would help the learners reach other 
sources and ways to attain their goals. This brings us to the argument that posthumanism 
posits, according to which, everything is relational in a learning assemblage where every 
factor has its own agency to exert through its relation to the others (Lenters & McDermott, 
2020). This clears the most debated discussion of whether AI and technology would 
replace teachers in education. Every factor in a learning assemblage has its role to play 
with varying degrees of agency depending on a particular social and cultural context. The 
contribution of LLMs and technology is expected to be higher in the learning process 
of a student who is taking online courses. Whereas a student pursuing a course in an 
institution might have various other factors with their own contextual and relational 
agencies contributing to her/his learning. Either way, the intervention of LLMs in the 
learning assemblage tremendously impacts the learners’ language proficiency.
6.1.3  Improving English language skills
The intervention enabled the learners to enhance their English language skills with 
the help of MKOs involved in the study (LLMs, peers and the researcher). It required 
them to communicate efficiently to discuss and share insights with their peer and 
work on their presentation skills as they had to present the ideas and the progress 
to the researcher (Fig.  7). They also worked on their writing skills by getting feed-
back from the researcher as well as LLMs (MKOs) as they had to produce a thor -
ough report by the end of the project. Report writing tasks within the purview of the 
‘English for Communication’ course curriculum were essential to equip the learners 
with the skills and abilities requisite for crafting comprehensive and professional 
Fig. 6  Collaboration among learners through the intervention of LLMs
Education and Information Technologies 
reports. Through the project, they learnt how to write professional and academic 
reports. Among twenty participants, seventeen of them mentioned that using LLMs 
helped in improving their academic writing skills. Learners also shared that they 
developed research skills through this intervention as they explored new academic 
avenues and systematic methods to write the review/report. Therefore, adhering to 
the established standards of formal report writing, the learners honed their skills 
concerning synthesising the information and coherently organising the content. This 
study’s intervention served as a platform to develop their research skills and under -
stand the complex nature of learning by acknowledging the role each factor had in 
their learning process.
6.2  LLMs as promoters of networked learning
From the collected data, the use of diverse prompts was observed while analysing 
the screen recordings. It was found that the learners used LLMs for various pur -
poses such as understanding concepts, knowing the current trends, exploring future 
scopes, learning vocabulary, making coherent connections between heterogeneous 
themes, structuring the essay, and many others. The learners used the preliminary 
information gathered from LLMs to explore more (Fig.  8) by using other online 
Fig. 7  Learners’ self-reflection on their improvement in English language skills
 Education and Information Technologies
resources such as Google web search, Quora, Wikipedia, YouTube, Blog Posts, 
Google Scholar, NoteGPT, and various educational databases.
For instance, one of the pairs used Gemini to learn Energy Efficiency and 
Resource Conservation individually; they then discussed their viewpoints, estab-
lished a common ground and made use of Google Docs, which can be accessed by 
both. After narrowing down the elements they were focussing on, they explored 
other resources to gather information about the same, carefully analysed the infor -
mation, summarised the content and recorded it on their Google Docs. Below are 
the figures (Figs.  9, 10, 11, 12, 13, and 14) displaying a small segment of their 
engagement which is representative.
The learners were exposed to diverse opinions that came from the 
technological resources, their peer, the researcher, and their prior knowledge. 
Through the intervention, they connected various sources of information, 
critically analysed them, and made further connections between and across 
fields, ideas and concepts. For instance, they were able to draw connections 
between superhero movies such as Batman and their topic, which involved 
Fig. 8  Learner sharing the usefulness of LLMs in gathering information
Fig. 9  Initial discussion among the learners
Education and Information Technologies 
discussions on metals, data, and climate change. One of the learners made 
connections that depicted the need for continual learning as he noted 
down a start-up idea on his mobile phone while he was reading an article 
and expressed his keen interest in learning more about lithium. Therefore, 
while it is easy to get distracted due to the plethora of information and other 
exciting features on the internet, the learners displayed the ability to make 
Fig. 10  Using LLM (ChatGPT) to initiate the dialogue and understand the concepts
Fig. 11  Using Google Scholar to access scholarly articles to gather critical insights on the ongoing dis-
cussion
 Education and Information Technologies
decisions on what to pay attention to and how to go forward with the group 
project. Hence, LLMs in the learning assemblage can promote networked 
learning, which adheres to the principles of connectivism. Below is a 
diagram visually depicting the possible connections that were made in the 
learning process (Fig. 15).
Such a networked learning experience enabled inquiry-based learning, fos-
tered digital literacy and critical thinking, and promoted academic responsibility 
among the learners, which is discussed further.
Fig. 12  Accessing research articles to know more about ‘Dependency and Vulnerability of Energy’, 
which was briefly mentioned by the LLM as one of the key considerations
Fig. 13  Accessing YouTube videos for simple and creative engagement regarding the topic
Education and Information Technologies 
6.2.1  Facilitation of inquiry‑based learning
The intervention of the study equipped the learners to explore different perspectives, 
retrieve relevant information, gather evidence by using other reliable resources, and 
formulate research questions to guide their inquiry. Learners were able to reflect on 
their inquiry process on individual and collaborative levels and synthesise their find-
ings as a review/report. They also expressed that, in the initial phase of the project, 
when they were not sure of what to work on, using LLMs was helpful as a starting 
point to explore potential areas of inquiry. This was also accompanied by their keen 
interest in the concepts that they were learning in their Energy and Environment 
Engineering class (Fig. 16).
Fig. 14  Noting down the key takeaways after connecting various sources of information
Fig. 15  Networked learning through LLMs
 Education and Information Technologies
6.2.2  Promoting networked learning and digital literacy
This intervention with LLMs promoted networked learning where the learners made 
connections across fields, ideas and concepts (Siemens, 2005a, b). They learnt from 
various sources, which include technology, peers, environment and the researcher. It 
was also observed that the learners were referring to films to understand the concepts 
better, making notes about specific concepts that have the potential to be start-up ideas 
(Fig.  17). The intervention also enabled the learners to effectively navigate digital spaces 
and improve their media literacy as they analysed various forms of media, including 
texts, audio, images and videos (Hockly, 2023). Through collaboration and networked 
learning, the learners had the opportunity to analyse various information sources, making 
inferences with respect to their credibility and limitations (Adeshola & Adepoju, 2023). 
Fig. 16  Kindling inquiry-based learning through LLMs
Fig. 17  Depicting networked learning from learners’ experiences
Education and Information Technologies 
For instance, fourteen participants among the twenty mentioned that privacy was a major 
concern while accessing various websites as they were required to log in or provide their 
data; they also noted that the information provided by LLMs seemed superficial and biased 
at some levels. The discussions also indicated that more than ten participants expressed 
that they felt frustrated when AI generates misleading or low-quality content, which 
makes its credibility questionable. Similarly, twelve participants among all affirmed that 
they felt both empowered and anxious while using AI for learning. Such an experience 
of incorporating LLMs in the learning assemblage enabled the learners to understand the 
social and emotional dimensions of utilising and comprehending them (Zhao et al., 2021) 
where they shared concerns regarding the possible cognitive and emotional dependence on 
AI, frustration and ethical dissonance caused by redundancy, and also the positive social 
aspects including the possibilities of peer interactions and collaborative working strategies.
6.2.3  Fostering critical thinking skills
The learners were able to analyse and evaluate the information produced by LLMs and 
synthesise all the relevant details obtained from various sources of information such as 
research articles, YouTube, Blog Posts, etc. (Kasneci et al., 2023). They had discussions 
with their peers to confirm the reliability of information produced by LLMs by applying 
their prior knowledge and experience in the field (Fig.  18). This experience enabled 
the learners to become active, discerning participants rather than passive recipients 
of AI-generated information who were able to interpret AI’s feedback critically and 
evaluate the accuracy of information with reliable sources such as research articles as 
well as discussions with their peers and the facilitator.
Fig. 18  Critical thinking and LLMs
 Education and Information Technologies
6.2.4  Promotion of academic responsibility
With the learner’s prior experience of using LLMs, interference of the teacher-
researcher and through this intervention, the learners were able to reflect on 
their digital competencies (Hockly, 2023) and collectively recognize the capa-
bilities and shortcomings of LLMs with their peers and the researcher. Although 
some participants shared in the initial stages of the study that they found AI 
and technological tools to be fascinating, through this study, they were able to 
recognise the social and ethical dimensions of using LLMs. Working in pairs 
and collaborating with the facilitator enabled transparency while working on 
the task, which led to identifying and understanding the potential risks, biases, 
issues with credibility, and quality of the content being generated by LLMs. 
Five participants were initially of the opinion that AI can replace the traditional 
classroom practices and even compromise on the role a teacher takes. However, 
their perspectives changed as they realised its effectiveness when used respon-
sibly with more awareness. The learners were able to locate potential biases 
by operationalising their critical thinking skills. They used LLMs responsibly 
given the ethical concerns they may pose, which was reviewed elaborately dur -
ing background discussion. They were also able to analyse the role of every ele-
ment in the learning process (Fig. 19).
Fig. 19  Responsible use of LLMs
Education and Information Technologies 
7  Findings
7.1  How do LLMs and AI chatbots support learners and educators in creating 
inclusive and academically responsible learning environments in an ESP 
classroom?
The data analysis demonstrated that LLMs as an intervention in the learning assem-
blage provided personalised learning to learners with different learning capacities 
and needs. In a classroom with a large number of students, LLMs can help ensure 
that all the learners who are familiar with technology can access the learning aids 
they need to succeed. This can reduce the stigma associated with learning differ -
ences and capabilities. Therefore, by providing personalised learning support, learn-
ers are motivated to feel confident and included in the class, thereby ensuring inclu-
sivity. Consequently, with the exposure to networked learning, the learners explored 
various tenets of digital technology and AI in the learning process, which improved 
their digital literacy skills. However, this opened avenues for discussions that con-
cerned the ethical consequences in the field of education.
It has been argued that the integration of AI and LLMs in education can lead to 
many ethical issues, disrupting the systematic functioning of the education system. 
The extensive use of AI and LLMs may lead to biases as the data produced by those 
models might not be credible. Studies have reported that students misuse AI and LLMs 
for unethical practices during examinations (Kohnke et  al., 2023). One of the learners 
exposed that he, along with his classmates, uses ChatGPT and Gemini to complete 
their assignments effortlessly (Cotton et al., 2024). Some disagreed and stated the lack 
of awareness to be a cause for its misuse. They also shared that some of their peers are 
addicted to Gemini and use it to the extent that their autonomy and thinking capacities can 
diminish (Fig. 20).
However, with the help of rigorous discussions and intervention, a perceptional 
change was witnessed among the learners concerning the responsible use of LLMs 
in the learning assemblage. One of the learners shared that, ‘I think we can’t com-
pletely rely on LLMs for learning. If we use it responsibly alongside the teachers, it 
would be amazing’ (SSI). Therefore, informed use of LLMs in a classroom can lead 
to the promotion of social and academic responsibility as a learner. The learners also 
shared that LLMs cannot be completely relied on as their responses might be prob-
lematic, vague and erroneous (Fig.  21). Therefore, using LLMs meaningfully and 
Fig. 20  The ethical concerns of using LLMs
 Education and Information Technologies
responsibly with an awareness of their potential and drawbacks can reduce the ethi-
cal and social consequences. This can be made possible by accommodating LLMs 
in classrooms ‘with’ the learners, alongside an MKO, similar to the intervention of 
this study.
A perceptional change concerning the ethics of using LLMs in classrooms facili-
tated academic responsibility and integrity among the learners. The interference of 
the researcher through the intervention enabled the learners to reflect on their digital 
competencies (Hockly, 2023) and collectively recognise the potential and shortcom-
ings of LLMs for maximum results. This also facilitated the learners to scrutinise 
the credibility of the information provided by the LLMs by operationalising their 
critical thinking abilities. Therefore, such interventions involving a collaborative 
endeavour involving teachers and learners together can promote academic responsi-
bility and the responsible use of AI and LLMs in the learning process.
7.2  What are the pedagogical implications of accommodating LLMs and AI 
Chatbots in developing the content knowledge of the learners?
The evidence from the data analysis suggested that accommodating LLMs and AI 
chatbots in classrooms to develop the content knowledge of the learners can facili-
tate inquiry-based learning, where the learners explore various perspectives, ana-
lyse the credibility of the information and investigate them from diverse learning 
avenues. This collaborative project/intervention fostered collaboration among the 
learners, the learner and LLMs, and the learners and the researcher. The learners 
also mentioned that such collaborative learning enabled them to approach any idea 
from diverse perspectives as they worked in pairs, reduced distractions due to a 
plethora of information and various sources online and improved their ability to be 
team players. This collaborative learning encouraged them to analyse and evaluate 
each other’s trajectories and the information produced by LLMs by operationalis-
ing their critical thinking skills. The intervention also promoted digital literacy and 
networked learning among the learners as they effectively explored digital spaces 
and developed their media literacy by analysing various forms of media, including 
images, texts, audio and videos.
Fig. 21  Learner expressing the unreliability of LLMs
Education and Information Technologies 
Consequently, the data analysis revealed that the use of LLMs in the classroom directly 
impacted the English language skills of the learners, as the intervention required them to 
discuss insights concerning their project and work on their presentation skills, which are 
required for effective communication. Similarly, the collaborative feedback and assistance 
provided by LLMs and the researcher contributed to the improvement in their writing 
skills as evidenced by their thorough project reports. The information presented in their 
submissions met the academic standards and was coherently organised.
8  Discussion
In posthuman times, where AI and technology are exerting their dominance over the 
education system, it becomes imperative to devise ways to tackle the current situa-
tion. Networked learning from the perspective of connectivism would acknowledge the 
complexities involved in the learning process (Omodan, 2023) and can suggest ways to 
accommodate AI and LLMs without disrupting the principles of education. In such an 
attempt, this study has contributed to the literature by documenting a posthumanist-con-
nectivist intervention and its implications in an English for Specific Purposes classroom. 
It suggests that LLMs can take up the role of an MKO and aid the learners with scaf-
folding and expanding their current developmental zones (Stojanov, 2023). It illustrates 
decentralised learning that emphasises the importance of networks (Downes, 2012). It 
affirms that every factor (human, non-human) contributes to the learning process through 
their relational agencies within a specific social and cultural context (Lenters & McDer -
mott, 2020). Concerning the facilitation of personalised learning, this study confirms 
the assertions made by Kasneci et al. (2023) and Tlili et al. (2023). Similarly, this study 
affirms that using LLMs through a connectivist approach can facilitate collaboration 
(Alam, 2023) and critical thinking skills (Kasneci et al., 2023). It also improved English 
language skills (Allagui, 2023; Fitria, 2023), such as writing and communication. While 
Long and Magerko (2020) contend that learners will require digital/AI literacy skills in 
education, this study reports the expansion of digital/AI literacy skills through collabora-
tion and details the networked learning fostered by digital literacy.
However, with the growing interest in LLMs in education, there are also many 
ethical concerns with regard to academic integrity as LLMs are referred to as ‘high-
tech plagiarism’ (Stewart, 2023). As a reaction to the enhanced risk for unethical 
practices, many universities and institutions expressed their willingness to revert to 
the traditional assessment formats involving pen and paper (Tlili et al., 2023). To 
address this issue, many have emphasised in their study the importance of reflect-
ing on the implications of LLMs ‘with’ learners (Farrokhnia et al., 2023; Supiano, 
2023). This is because there is a gap between the teachers’ expectations and learn-
ers’ lived realities. While the teachers expect the learners to show academic integ-
rity, the learners choose to use LLMs due to the convenience they provide with their 
academic tasks. Therefore, encouraging learners to work with LLMs alongside a 
more knowledgeable human, preferably a teacher, and engaging them in discussions 
about ethical concerns, academic integrity, principles of education and limitations 
of LLMs can help in collectively and responsibly adapting to such technological 
innovations (Abramson, 2023). On that account, this study helps in bridging the 
 Education and Information Technologies
gap between learners and teachers as the intervention enabled the researcher and the 
learners to collectively reflect on its limitations and possible ways of accommodat-
ing them in the learning assemblage with constructive pedagogical implications. To 
ensure the responsible use of AI tools, educators can create awareness of AI’s limi-
tations, including bias and potential misinformation. They can encourage learners to 
use LLMs for learning enhancement rather than generating content for assignments, 
guide learners to evaluate AI-generated content critically by providing examples and 
case studies and educate them about data privacy.
Given the number of participants, the findings of the study are constrained by 
limitations and are contingent upon a specific context. As a consequence, the appli-
cability of the study’s inferences may not be valid for learners of diverse levels, 
especially those who lack digital literacy (Kohnke et al., 2023). Alam (2023) also 
mentions the need for digital literacy, as the connectivist approach relies on technol-
ogy and digital spaces. Kohnke et al. (2023) also assert that there are specific forms 
of digital competence required to use LLMs in a classroom, including technological 
proficiency, pedagogical compatibility and social awareness, which is established 
in this study. Therefore, familiarisation of AI and LLMs to learners and teachers 
becomes imperative to navigate the rapid technological advancements.
9  Conclusion
The study discussed the possibility of new teaching and learning methods in an ESP 
classroom that incorporate AI and LLMs from the perspective of Vygotsky’s MKO 
and posthuman connectivist approach. This attempt illustrated the non-linear and 
networked learning involving human, non-human and technological resources in the 
learning assemblage. It explored the efficacy of LLMs as pedagogical tools in an 
ESP classroom. The results of the study detailed the pedagogical implications in 
developing the content knowledge of the learners and asserted that the intervention 
facilitated inquiry-based learning, critical thinking, communication, report writing, 
digital literacy and research skills. The findings also affirmed that the rational use 
of LLMs can create inclusive and academically responsible learning environments.
Despite the rising concerns regarding academic integrity and ethical issues, the 
study suggested that educationists and learners should find ways to collectively work 
and accommodate LLMs in classrooms. The responsible use of LLMs can be fos-
tered by reflecting on their potential and limitations along ‘with’ learners, which was 
attempted in this study. Therefore, the study provides scope for the exploration of 
LLMs and creative interventions in educational practices. Further research on LLMs 
can adopt a mixed-method study to demonstrate many other potential trajectories in 
English language education. Future studies could also explore the long-term impact 
of LLM integration on learners’ writing autonomy and metacognitive development. 
Comparative studies across different educational contexts could provide deeper 
insights into the scalability of AI-assisted learning. Additionally, empirical inves-
tigations into educators’ perspectives on LLMs as a pedagogical tool could further 
enhance our understanding of how they reshape teaching methodologies.
Education and Information Technologies 
Appendix
Learner’s composition examples
See Figs. 22 and 23 here.
Fig. 22  Sample 1 of the report submitted by the learners
 Education and Information Technologies
Funding The study did not receive any funding from any organisation.
Data availability All the data of this qualitative, exploratory study can be made available on request.
Declarations 
Disclosure statement The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
References
Abramson, A. (2023). How to use ChatGPT as a learning tool. Monitor on Psychology, 54(4). Retrieved 
from https:// www. apa. org/ monit  or/ 2023/ 06/ chatg pt- learn ing- tool. Accessed 3 Dec 2023.
Adeshola, I., & Adepoju, A. P. (2023). The opportunities and challenges of ChatGPT in education. Inter -
active Learning Environments, 32(10), 6159–6172. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 10494 820. 2023. 22538 
58
Adu, K., Badaru, K., Duku, N., & Adu, E. (2022). Innovation and technology: A panacea to teaching and 
learning challenges during the Covid-19 lockdown in South Africa. Research in Social Sciences and 
Technology, 7(1), 69–89.
Fig. 23  Sample 2 of the report submitted by the learners
Education and Information Technologies 
Aksal, F. A., Gazi, Z. A., & Bahçelerli, N. M. (2013). Practice of connectivism as learning theory: 
Enhancing learning process through social networking site (Facebook). Gaziantep University Jour -
nal of Social Sciences, 12(2), 243–252.
Alam, M. A. (2023). Connectivism learning theory and connectivist approach in teaching and learning: A 
review of literature. Bhartiyam International Journal of Education & Research, 12(2), 1–15.
Ali, J. K. M., Shamsan, M. A. A., Hezam, T. A., & Mohammed, A. A. Q. (2023). Impact of ChatGPT on 
learning motivation: Teachers and students’ voices. Journal of English Studies in Arabia Felix, 2(1), 
41–49. https:// doi. org/ 10. 56540/ jesaf. v2i1. 51
Allagui, B. (2023). Chatbot Feedback on students’ writing: Typology of comments and effectiveness. 
In O. Gervasi, B. Murgante, A. M. A. C. Rocha, C. Garau, F. Scorza, Y. Karaca, spsampsps C. M. 
Torre (Eds.), International conference on computational science and its applications (pp. 377–384). 
Springer. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 978-3- 031- 37129-5_ 31
Bender, S. M. (2024). Awareness of artificial intelligence as an essential digital literacy: ChatGPT and 
Gen-AI in the classroom. Changing English, 31(2), 161–174. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 13586 84X. 
2024. 23099 95
Bock, T., & Sergeant, J. (2002). Small sample market research. International Journal of Market Research, 
44(2), 1–7. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 14707 85302 04400 205
Buchanan-Oliver, M. (2015). The spectre of posthumanism in technology consumption: The death of the 
human?. In Death in a consumer culture (pp. 300–315). Routledge.
Castells, M. (2000). Toward a sociology of the network society. Contemporary Sociology, 29, 693–699.
Cotton, D. R., Cotton, P. A., & Shipway, J. R. (2024). Chatting and cheating: Ensuring academic integrity 
in the era of ChatGPT. Innovations in Education and Teaching International, 61(2), 228–239.
Davies, R. S., Dean, D. L., & Ball, N. (2013). Flipping the classroom and instructional technology inte-
gration in a college-level information systems spreadsheet course. Educational Technology Research 
and Development, 61, 563–580.
Davoodi, A. (2024). Crafting innovative paths in non-linear professional learning for bilingual education: 
The role of connectivism in the age of AI.  Professional Development in Education, 1–17. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 19415 257. 2024. 24214 92
Downes, S. (2005a). An introduction to connective knowledge [Web log post]. Retrieved from http:// 
www. downes. ca/ post/ 33034. Accessed 21 Dec 2023.
Downes, S. (2005b). An introduction to connective knowledge. In T. Hug (Eds.), Media, knowledge & 
education exploring new spaces, relations and dynamics in digital media ecologies. Innsbruck Uni-
versity Press.
Downes, S. (2012). Connectivism and connective knowledge: Essays on meaning and learning networks. 
National Research Council Canada.
Dudeney, G., & Hockly, N. (2012). ICT in ELT: How did we get here and where are we going? ELT Jour -
nal, 66(4), 533–542.
Farrokhnia, M., Banihashem, S. K., Noroozi, O., & Wals, A. (2023). A SWOT analysis of ChatGPT: 
Implications for educational practice and research. Innovations in Education and Teaching Interna-
tional, 1–15. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 14703 297. 2023. 21958 46
Fitria, T. N. (2023). Artificial intelligence (AI) technology in OpenAI ChatGPT application: A review 
of ChatGPT in writing English essay. ELT Forum: Journal of English Language Teaching, 12(1), 
44–58. https:// doi. org/ 10. 15294/ elt. v12i1. 64069
Hasse, C. (2022). Humanism, posthumanism, and new humanism: How robots challenge the anthropo-
logical object. In The Palgrave handbook of the anthropology of technology (pp. 145–164). Palgrave 
Macmillan. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 978- 981- 16- 7084-8_7
Heaven, W. D. (2023). ChatGPT is going to change education, not destroy it. MITTechnology Review. 
Retrieved from https:// www. techn ology review. com/ 2023/ 04/ 06/ 10710 59/- chatg pt- change- not- destr 
oy- educa tion- openai/. Accessed 14 Nov 2023.
Hockly, N. (2023). Artificial intelligence in English language teaching: The good, the bad and the ugly. 
Relc Journal, 54(2), 445–451.
Jeon, J., & Lee, S. (2023). Large language models in education: A focus on the complementary rela-
tionship between human teachers and ChatGPT. Education and Information Technologies, 28(12), 
15873–15892.
Jung, I. (2019). Connectivism and networked learning. Open and distance education theory revisited: 
Implications for the digital era (pp. 47–55). https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 978- 981- 13- 7740-2_6
 Education and Information Technologies
Kasneci, E., Sebler, K., Kuchemann, S., Bannert, M., Dementieva, D., Fischer, F., ..., & Kasneci, G. 
(2023). ChatGPT for good? On opportunities and challenges of large language models for educa-
tion. Learning and Individual Differences, 103, 102274.
Kern, R. (2006). Perspectives on technology in learning and teaching languages. Tesol Quarterly, 40(1), 
183–210.
Kohnke, L., Moorhouse, B. L., & Zou, D. (2023). ChatGPT for language learning and teaching. RELC 
Journal. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 00336 88223 11628
Kostka, I., & Toncelli, R. (2023). Exploring applications of ChatGPT to English language teaching: 
Opportunities, challenges, and recommendations. Tesl-Ej, 27(3), n3.
Lenters, K., & McDermott, M. (2020). Orienting map I: Mapping posthuman concepts. Affect, embodi-
ment, and place in critical literacy: Assembling theory and practice (pp. 19–28). Routledge.
Liang, E. S., & Bai, S. (2024). Generative AI and the future of connectivist learning in higher education. 
Journal of Asian Public Policy, 1–23. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 17516 234. 2024. 23860 85
Liu, S., Kang, L., Liu, Z., Zhao, L., Yang, Z., & Su, Z. (2023). Exploring the relationships between 
students’ network characteristics, discussion topics and learning outcomes in a course discussion 
forum. Journal of Computing in Higher Education, 35(3), 487–520.
Long, D., & Magerko, B. (2020). What is AI literacy? Competencies and design considerations. In Pro -
ceedings of the 2020 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems (pp. 1–16). https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1145/ 33138 31. 33767 27
Omodan, B. I. (2023). Analysis of connectivism as a tool for Posthuman University classrooms. Journal 
of Curriculum Studies Research, 5(1), 1–12. https:// doi. org/ 10. 46303/ jcsr. 2023.2
Pavlik, J. V. (2023). Collaborating with ChatGPT: Considering the implications of generative artificial 
intelligence for journalism and media education. Journalism & Mass Communication Educator. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 10776 95822 11495 77
Rahman, M. M., & Watanobe, Y. (2023). ChatGPT for education and research: Opportunities, threats, 
and strategies. Applied Sciences, 13(9), 5783. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3390/ app13 095783
Rowe, N. C. (2004). Cheating in online student assessment: Beyond plagiarism. Online Journal of Dis-
tance Learning Administration, 7(2), 1–10.
Siemens, G. (2005a). Connectivism: A learning theory for the digital age. International Journal of 
Instructional Technology and Distance Learning, 2(1), 3–10. Retrieved from http:// itdl. org/ Journ al/ 
Jan_ 05/ Jan_ 05. pdf. Accessed 14 Nov 2023.
Siemens, G. (2005b). Connectivism: Learning as network-creation. ASTD Learning News, 10(1), 1–28.
Sozudogru, O., Altinay, M., Dagli, G., Altinay, Z., & Altinay, F. (2019). Examination of connectivist the-
ory in English language learning: The role of online social networking tool. International Journal of 
Information and Learning Technology, 36(4), 354–363. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1108/ IJILT- 02- 2019- 0018
Stewart, J. (2023). Noam Chomsky says ChatGPT is a form of "high-tech plagiarism". My Modern Met. 
https:// mymod ernmet. com/ noam- choms ky- chat- gpt/. Accessed 26 Nov 2023.
Stojanov, A. (2023). Learning with ChatGPT 3.5 as a more knowledgeable other: An autoethnographic 
study. International Journal of Educational Technology in Higher Education, 20(1), 35.
Su, Z., Li, Y., Liu, Z., Sun, J., Yang, Z., & Liu, S. (2023). An analysis approach for blended learning 
based on weighted multiplex networks. Educational Technology Research and Development, 71(5), 
1941–1963.
Sullivan, M., Kelly, A., & McLaughlan, P. (2023). ChatGPT in higher education: Considerations for aca-
demic integrity and learning. Journal of Applied Learning and Teaching, 6(1), 31–40. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 37074/ jalt. 2023.6. 1. 17
Supiano, B. (2023). Will ChatGPT change how professors assess learning? The chronicle of higher edu-
cation. https:// www. chron icle. com/ artic le/ will- chatg pt- change- how- profe ssors- assess- learn ing. 
Accessed 22 Jan 2024.
Susnjak, T., & McIntosh, T. R. (2024). ChatGPT: The end of online exam integrity? Education Sciences, 
14(6), 656.
Tlili, A., Shehata, B., Adarkwah, M. A., Bozkurt, A., Hickey, D. T., Huang, R., & Agyemang, B. (2023). 
What if the devil is my guardian angel: ChatGPT as a case study of using chatbots in education. 
Smart Learning Environments, 10(1), 15.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1987). Thinking and speech. In R. W. Rieber spsampsps A. S. Carton (Eds.), The col-
lected works of L. S. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 978-1- 4613- 1655-8
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Harvard 
University Press.
Education and Information Technologies 
Wang, F. (2023). IoT for smart English education: AI-based personalised learning resource recommenda-
tion algorithm. International Journal of Computer Applications in Technology, 71(3), 200–207.
Wang, M., & Guo, W. (2023). The potential impact of ChatGPT on education: Using history as a rear -
view mirror. ECNU Review Education. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 20965 31123 11898 26
Wang, Z., Anderson, T., & Chen, L. (2018). How learners participate in connectivist learning: An analy -
sis of the interaction traces from a cMOOC. International Review of Research in Open and Distrib-
uted Learning, 19(1), 45–67. https:// doi. org/ 10. 19173/ irrodl. v19i1. 3269
Zainal, Z. (2007). Case study as a research method. Jurnal Kemanusiaan, 5(1). Retrieved from https:// 
jurna lkema nusia an. utm. my/ index. php/ keman usiaan/ artic le/ view/ 165. Accessed 8 Jan 2024.
Zhao, Y., Llorente, A. M. P., & Gómez, M. C. S. (2021). Digital competence in higher education 
research: A systematic literature review. Computers & Education, 168, 104212. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1016/j. compe du. 2021. 104212
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps 
and institutional affiliations.
Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this article under 
a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted 
manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of such publishing agreement and 
applicable law.
