Вестник Томского государственного университета. Культурология и искусствоведение . 
2025. № 57. С. 25–39. 
© D.V. Galkin, Weng Wei , 2025 Tomsk State University Journal of Cultural Studies and Art History . 2025. 57. pp. 25– 39. 
 
Original article  
УДК 7.01  
doi: 10.17223/22220836/57/ 3 
THE ROLE OF GENERATI VE ARTIFICIAL INTELL IGENCE  
IN MODERN DESIGN: TH EORETICAL CONSIDERAT IONS  
Dmitry V. Galkin1, Weng Wei2 
1, 2 National Research Tomsk State University, Tomsk, Russian Federation  
1 gdv_t@mail.ru  
2 vivianglia2022@outlook.com  
Abstract.  This paper explores the role of artificial intelligence (AI) in modern design, 
particularly focusing on the theoretical foundations of delegation of functional tasks. It 
begins by discussing the agency of things from an object -oriented approach and how it  
relates to AI. The concept of delegation is examined in detail, considering its meaning and 
implications for design. The capabilities of AI are analyzed, and different levels of AI 
development are presented. The paper then delves into the shift from humanism to non-
humanism in design, highlighting the changes brought about by generative AI, such as deep 
human -computer collaboration, data as a core resource, and systematic innovation. It also 
addresses issues like data quality, design originality, and the i ntegration of AI in various 
design aspects. Additionally, it touches on AI governance and the influence of object -
oriented ontology (OOO) on design thinking. Finally, it concludes that design should aim to maximize the quality of human -centered lives, whil e also acknowledging the growing 
importance of design synergy in complex cultures.  
Keywords:  generative design, artificial intelligence, delegation, non- human a gents, object -
oriented approach  
For citation:  Galkin D.V.  & Weng Wei  (2025) . The role of generative artificial intelligence 
in modern design: theoretical considerations . Vestnik Tomskogo gosudarstvennogo univers i-
teta. Kul’turologiya i iskusstvovedenie – Tomsk State University Journal of Cultural Studies 
and Art History . 57. pp. 25 –39. (In Russ ian). doi: 10.17223/22220836/57/ 3 
Научная статья  
РОЛЬ ГЕНЕРАТИВНОГО ИСКУССТВЕННОГО ИНТЕЛЛЕКТА  
В СОВРЕМЕННОМ ДИЗАЙН Е: ТЕОРЕТИЧЕСКИЕ АСП ЕКТЫ 
Дмитрий Владимирович Галкин1, Вэн Вэй2 
1, 2 Национальный исследовательский Томский государственный университет,  
Томск, Россия  
1 gdv_t@mail.ru  
2 vivianglia2022@outlook.com  
Аннотация.  В статье исследует ся роль генеративного искусственного интеллекта в 
современном дизайне, особенно сосредоточив внимание на теоретических основаниях 
делегирования функциональных задач. Ав торы исходят из объектно- ориенти-
рованного подхода, обсуждая структуру практики и их отношение с искусственным 
интеллектом. Понятие делегирования подробно исследуется, учитывается его знач е-
ние и влияние на дизайн. Анализируются способности генеративного ис кусственного 
Galkin D.V. , Weng Wei . The role of generative artificial intelligence in modern design  
26 интеллекта и представлены различные уровни развития искусственного интеллекта. 
Авторы обращаются к проблеме перехода от гуманизма к не- гуманизму в дизайне, 
подчеркивая изменения, принесенные генеративным искусственным интеллектом, та-
кие как гл убокое человеко- машинное сотрудничество, использование данных как 
ключевого ресурса и систематизированное инновационное творчество. Также обсу ж-
даются проблемы качества данных, оригинальности дизайна и интеграции иску с-
ственного интеллекта с различными облас тями дизайна. Кроме того, затрагивает ся 
влияние управления искусственным интеллектом и объектно -ориентированной онто-
логии на дизайнерское мышление. В заключение подчеркивается, что дизайн должен 
стремиться максимизировать качество жизни, ориентированное на  человека, и призн а-
ет важность возрастающей синергии дизайна в сложной культуре.  
Ключевые слова:  генеративный дизайн, искусственный интеллект, делегирование, не-
человеческие агенты, объектно- ориентированный подход  
Для цитирования:  Галкин  Д.В., Вэн Вэй. Роль  генеративного искусственного инте л-
лекта в современном дизайне: теоретические аспекты // Вестник Томского госуда р-
ственного университета. Культурология и искусствоведение . 2025. № 57. С. 25–39. doi: 
10.17223/22220836/57/ 3 
1. Introduction  
The agency of things, as proposed by the object -oriented approach in 
anthropological theory, is strongly influencing the analysis of technological 
achievements today. This approach suggests taking into account various 
manifestations of non- human action. The development of artificial intelligence 
systems in various fields demonstrates the importance of considering this agency. 
The delegation of functional tasks that are realized by a professionals is an 
important aspect that the paper will consider. The paper will look at  the application 
of AI based on artificial neural networks in design from the point of view of this 
delegation. What type of partnership can be formed with 'non- human' agents in the 
design profession? In what manner can the object be seamlessly incorporate d into 
our cognition? What actions can be taken under extreme hypothetical circumstances, such as when a non -human attains consciousness analogous to that 
of a human being? In what manner can the relationship between humans and objects be modeled?  
2. Probl em Space of Design  
In the history of thought, the 'Argument from Design' posits the existence of a 
supernatural designer based on the regularity and order of nature, asserting that all 
entities in the world are designed by God to benefit humanity (known as  the 
'teleological argument'). Conversely, evolution (or cosmogony) refutes the notion 
of a purposive designer while simultaneously denying the exis tence of a 
supernatural creator  [1. P. 75]. The paradigm shift in design that confronts problem 
solving at this time, when our design is in a period of transition from a symbolist 
AI to a connectivist AI, corresponds to both of these philosophical proposit ions. 
The problem space is the internal representation of the task environment used by 
the subject. The subject of this paper, 'From Delegation of Functional Tasks to 
Design Synergy,' encompasses both a pre -assignment and a post -assignment state, 
each situ ated within a problem space, which refers to the internal representation of 
the task environment utilized by the subject. environment utilized by the subject  
[2. P. 56], the problem space is used to describe all possible states and operations 
involved in the problem solving process. Functional tasking proble ms are design 
Культурология, теория и история культуры / Culturology, the theo ry and cultural history  
27 challenges that involve addressing specific issues in the real world. Simon 
discerned certain 'non -discussable problems' within his Problem Space Theory via 
the process of elimination, and Simon and Newell formulated the foundational 
framewor k of the General Problem Solver (GPS) theory  [2. P. 15]. The concept of 
problem space is extensively utilized in the design of search algorithms, including the A* algorithm, within the domain of artificial intelligence.  
Solutions to this problems in traditional professional fields are often limited, 
as Herbe rt Simon describes the ‘limited problems’ that arise in a closed and well -
defined world [3. P. 181–201] . Herbert Simon characterizes marginal design 
problems that are challenging to explicitly define for problem -solving, specifically 
the application of ill -structured problem s (ISPs) to address the issue of design 
definition. This approach is ingenious as it preserves the scalability of the problem 
space while systematically narrowing the definition through exclusion. The 
design's purpose is clearly articulated as a response t o a persistent issue, rather than 
the achievement of a particular objective. Simon and his colleagues utilized heuristics in their research; for instance, in the creation of the General Problem Solver (GPS), they applied the heuristic of means -end analysis  to replicate the 
human problem -solving process. Simon has introduced heuristics into the design 
process by defining design as an activity grounded in logical inquiry and the 
achievement of specific objectives, thereby rendering it more scientific and 
peda gogically accessible [4]. 
Simon's design theory remains prevalent in the design community. His model 
of the decision- making process characterizes design as the identification, 
formulation, and evaluation of feasible alter natives. Simon's theories, highlighting 
the scientific and methodical aspects of the design process, have propelled the 
evolution of contemporary applications like parametric design, which has shifted 
design from dependence on intuition and experience to a  mathematically and 
logically manipulable form. He partnered with CAD expert Eastman to create 
ICAD and enabled the transition from command -line interfaces to graphical user 
interfaces (GUIs). Simon contends that problems can be perceived as structured 
processes [3], while 'unstructured problems' (ISPs) are characterized by an absence 
of clear structure. I f a problem is not a structured problem (WSP), it is classified as 
an unstructured problem (ISP). Simon illustrates the process of designing a house, 
wherein the architect encounters an initially unstructured problem that progressively evolves into a struc tured problem through recollection and 
experience. Notwithstanding the constraints of these methodologies in addressing intricate and inadequately structured design challenges, they nonetheless represent the preliminary investigation of heuristics for desi gn automation. 
During the Symbolic period, Artificial Intelligence (Symbolic AI) embraced 
Simon's problem methodology, which focused on structured knowledge 
representation that was easily manipulable and conducive to reasoning, applicable 
across various do mains. Prevalent methodologies for knowledge representation 
encompass rule -based systems and ontologies. In the mid -1960s, John McCarthy 
introduced contextual algorithms to address events and actions in a dynamic environment, which became a crucial instrum ent for managing time and change in 
Symbolic AI, with applications in automated planning and reasoning systems, including floor -sweeping robots and autonomous vehicles. In 1997, IBM's Deep 
Blue, utilizing advanced hardware and search algorithms, achieved v ictory over the 
Galkin D.V. , Weng Wei . The role of generative artificial intelligence in modern design  
28 world chess champion, highlighting the significance of symbolic processing and 
heuristic search in intricate strategy games. The AI of AlphaGo that triumphed 
over Ke Jie employed analogous concepts.  
Symbolist AI depends on rigid rules and l ogical reasoning, resulting in 
suboptimal performance when confronted with ambiguous or incomplete information. In natural language understanding and sentiment analysis, human 
language and emotional expressions are often ambiguous and polysemous, 
presentin g a challenge for systems reliant on fixed symbols and rules. Moreover, 
symbolic systems necessitate a knowledge base that is manually encoded by 
experts, which is both time -consuming and labor -intensive, thereby constraining 
the system's flexibility. The system may require reconfiguration or expansion of 
the knowledge base upon encountering a new context. The scalability of Symbolist AI is constrained by the necessity for pre -established rules and knowledge to 
accommodate extensive or dynamically evolving data. In the Internet era, the rapid 
evolution of data and the proliferation of information render it exceedingly 
challenging to sustain and update the knowledge base of a Symbolist system, thereby underscoring its limitations for specific design issues. 
3. Gen -AI and Problem Spaces  
The design task involving generative AI transcends the rule -based model of 
problem spaces, confronting multiple simultaneous problem spaces, each with 
distinct environments (semiospheres), thereby rendering the problem an unsolvable 
Wicked Problem [5]. Occasionally, rather than simplifying, the resolution to the 
problem may lead to an increase in entropy; design thinking could address the 
challenge of Wicked Problem when a limited number of those are engaged [6], yet 
in distributed AI collaborating with widespread crowds, it  may not be effective due 
to a divergence between the methodologies employed by generative AI and those 
utilized by conventional designers  (Conventionalist). The primary objective of 
contemporary connectionist AI is to train it to accurately perceive reali ty. This 
objective includes several renowned methodologies, such as AlphaGo's forecasting 
of Go moves and the 1986 backpropagation algorithm by Hinton and Rumelhart, 
which modifies parameters via error to enhance precision. Bengio examined 
techniques for deriving useful insights from unlabeled data utilizing 
backpropagation. Yann LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton created the convolutional 
neural network LeNet -5 for handwriting recognition, while AlexNet, developed by 
Szegedy, Krizhevsky, in conjunction with Hinton, significantly enhanced image 
recognition accuracy. Hassabis' AlphaFold forecasts protein three -dimensional 
structures utilizing amino acid distance histograms, thereby enhancing AI 
recognition capabilities in microbiology. The self -attention mechanism of the 
Transformer model enhances the efficiency of processing extensive sequential 
data, facilitating advancements in tasks like natural language processing. These 
technologies consistently acquire and analyze real -world data, generating a 'stream' 
of inform ation that provides AI with Method of Exhaustion within a clearly 
delineated dialogue problem domain. 
Chomsky contends that despite the Method of Exhaustion applied to 
conversational AI, generative AI is fundamentally a program, which he perceives 
as a theory articulated in machine -readable notation. Machines such as ChatGPT 
do not withhold responses and will address any inquiries posed, generating strange 
Культурология, теория и история культуры / Culturology, the theo ry and cultural history  
29 theories; however, strange theories are still classified as theories [7]. These theories 
originate from data, and he emphasiz es that data do not constitute explanations as 
they fail to provide evidence; evidence is a relational concept, and data do not 
directly yield evidence, much less explanations. Furthermore, vast quantities of 
data can be simulated, yet simulation does not equate to explanation. Hinton 
criticised Chomsky's theory of language, language is obviously learned; Large neural networks learn language without any innate structure, they just start learning 
from random weights and large amounts of data; Chomsky never proposed any kind of theory about semantics, his theories were all about syntax [8]. The 
neurological or strong AI perspective posits that causal reasoning and human comprehension of the world are inherent within the data. J. Searle's Chinese Room argument posits that a computer merely manipulates symbols according to 
predefined rules and lacks awareness of the meaning of the symbols it processes. “The contrast is that according to Strong AI, the correct simulation really is a mind. 
According to Weak AI, the correct simulation is a model of the mind.”  It is a 
strong criticism of the Strong AI position, which claims that the mind is merely a computer programme [9]. 
The author experienced a similar phenomenon when using GPT to translate 
text daily. Learning a second language often involves grammar. Grammatical 
usage is  often overlooked by first language learners. In Chinese and English, the 
author wanted to distinguish between ‘ 生成设计’ and ‘ 设计生产’ when studying 
the translation problem. In contrast, the author discovered that in Chinese, the verb 
and adjective lexemes of ‘ 生成’  a n d  ‘ 设计 ’ can be automatically switched after 
their inflections swap. The author was inspired to write because these two phrases 
can confuse Chinese readers. However, the suffix in English requires the adjective 
to be in front of the noun, and the exchange of position must be preceded by a 
change in the word's lexical nature, which is equivalent to the automatic setting of 
an inflectional premise in English. There is no confusion, which cancels the 
author's previous motivation to write.  
English is strict, while Chinese is freer. The formal rules of Chinese and 
English differ. GPT doesn't know this until the user consciously pursues the 
question, at which point it organizes its language to give the database answer. So 
far, GPT is a search engine with a sel f-ordering mechanism from known to known. 
This shows that just one language mechanism is enough to influence the motivation of a person's behaviour, but the GPT does not know how to be silent. 
Wittgenstein's game theory of language has helped AI researcher s understand its 
complexities and meaning. Many rule -based or statistical NLP methods ignore 
context. Modern AI models like the Transformer architecture and the GPT family use context -aware mechanisms like attention mechanisms to better capture 
language dy namics and contextual dependencies.  
4. Gen -AI's Design Creativity Status  
Design is a typical service industry that targets a population. AI is needed to 
unlock data's potential and bring data and mathematical models ‘from the known to the unknown’. Culture  is ‘collective non -hereditary memory’ [10],  ‘ a  s y s t e m  o f  
symbols subject to structural rules’ [11], the semiosphere [12]. This clarifies why 
today's generative AI can easily change image style from a humanistic perspective. 
Designers usually use their intuition to evoke memories and turn them into 
Galkin D.V. , Weng Wei . The role of generative artificial intelligence in modern design  
30 symbols, which can be visualized as images or verbalized as language. GPT proves 
that language can be structured. The designer must incorporate symbols (visual, 
stylistic, or structural) into the language to achieve synergy and resource 
deployment to make the program feasible. As if building a wheel, designers must 
contact the developer to start working from the source, where the symbols are not 
yet fully dematerialized. AI developers are pioneering this multimodal process of data translation.  
So-called creativity, in a statistical sense, may in most cases be the very 
‘coincidence’ that has never been to uched in human history. They say we can't 
imagine what we haven't seen. If the whole world has never been exposed to an event, 
the coincidence has not yet occurred, and even if it has, it may be forgotten without a symbol. Artistic creation or innovative d esign is usually an unstructured problem, but 
statistical creativity may be a ‘search’. Modern Generative Artificial Intelligence uses “language games ” to structure this unstructured task. Generative AI and language 
have rationalized ‘stylized’ creativity.  Since we still don't have established GPT 
creativity status, OpenAI's O series of products are trying to break through this area. Creativity belongs to what Herbert Simon called the unstructured ‘The residual’ 
[2. P. 314]. Reasoning can compensate for the ‘The residual’. The problem space can 
be construc ted incrementally as the need for each component arises. The fact that B ig 
Data has become so big is a side effect of the fact that much of the domain 
knowledge cannot be shared within existing structures and frameworks. 
Designing for one's own needs shows  that man acts as his own God. Evolution 
is the end in itself, expanding mankind's boundaries. Traditional design's problem 
space e xists only in the world where humans are alive; as long as they are human, 
they can only live in society and culture. Symboli sm design's problem space is 
constrained by human beings, so it lives in symbols and dies under symbols and 
cannot escape the shackles of ‘style’. In the early 20th century, the phenomenologist 
Husserl pioneered the epoch “brackets,Ф  which suppresses judgment, puts aside 
controversy, ‘exists but does not exist’, and uses all pre -existing concepts (theories, 
preconceptions, authorities, traditions...) as the basis for a new design approach. The fatal attraction of the ‘non -human’, whic h can expand our imagination for life and 
functioning beyond our reach, compels us to always extend these possibilities, and this 
problematic space has become intercultural. Collaboration with ‘non- human’ is 
meaningful and life -affirming. With a clear dire ction , at least when using “non-
human" agents, cooperation still solves human- oriented problems, and our problem 
space is always established. We all know AI's ‘non -human’ properties, but we all 
know it has ‘superhuman’ properties. The simple definition of AI as a ‘thing’ or 
‘non- human’ leaves room for problems.  
5. Subjective Activity and Automation  
In Heidegger’s account humans and techne connected in taking care. Care 
shows in our use of tools like hammers, as well as in our concern for others and the world. We used to view machines as tools without considering that they were 
completely “out of control. ” With the rapid development of AI, when the ‘non-
human’ is more and more likely to act independently from human control, we need a new perspective to examin e the possibility and necessity of appropriately 
assigning roles to AI in future design to prepare for man -made accidents that 
threaten human survival.  
Культурология, теория и история культуры / Culturology, the theo ry and cultural history  
31 For object -oriented ontology the idea is that humans, non- human and things 
should be regarded equally and allowed to play the same role in actor networks. 
Speculative realism focuses on the relationship between subject and object and emphasizes the independence and autonomy of the object. In some viewpoints of 
speculative realism, the subject's understanding  of the object is limited, and the 
object has characteristics that transcend the subject's cognition. “Delegation ” can 
be regarded as a behavior in which the subject entrusts power or tasks to the object. 
This has a certain similarity to the relationship b etween subject and object in 
speculative realism. For example, from the perspective of speculative realism, 
human subjects may not be able to fully understand and control natural objects. In 
the process of human exploration and utilization of nature, some tasks may be 
“entrusted ” to nature, allowing nature to complete certain things according to its 
own laws and characteristics. This has a certain echo with the concept of “delegation ”. 
The specialized field of artificial intelligence was created for this pu rpose. The 
idea that AI mimics humans is to view them as machines with abstract algorithms and parameters to mimic human behavior. The ‘digitization’ of the office has led 
AI scientists to see humans as machines. Today's big language models are good at 
structuring unstructured data, which will replace many industries and office 
workers. For instance, customer service and receptionists process data, especially in a loft with a single workstation, turning people into data processing machines 
with no actual work. Effective data classification and processing by AI frees people 
from digital Verdinglichung.  
People have spontaneous flexible processing of information and data, they 
take the initiative, but they are also obsessive -compulsive, which is why they still 
play an important role in the digitization process nearly half a century later. AI 
technology's self -directed learning matches human autonomy. Humans must fight 
the “discomfort ” (pain) of the ever -changing natural world to gain autonomy. In 
phenomenology i t is believed that suffering changes how we perceive and exist in 
the world. Regarding subjective agency, existentialist philosopher Jean- Paul Sartre 
believed that even in the most difficult situations, people have the freedom to choose their own attitudes , which is subjective agency.  
Everyone acts because they know pain will come. All this discomfort becomes 
pain and reaching body limits is death. The pineal gland in the brain, where the 
mind interacts with the body, receives nerve signals when the body is  hurt, 
according to René Descartes' mind -body dualism. Minds perceive pineal gland 
signals as pain. Everyone acts because they know pain will come. All this discomfort becomes pain, and reaching body limits is death. The pineal gland in 
the brain, where the mind interacts with the body, receives nerve signals when the 
body is hurt, according to René Descartes' mind -body dualism. Minds perceive 
pineal gland signals as pain. (On Man, 1667, § 78) [13]. Bianchin developed the 
“Pleasurist's algorithm ” to measure behavior's pleasure and pain [14. P. 56] . 
Humans improve design strategies to meet their needs. Scientists must set AI's 
thresh old to automate. 
6. Delegation as a Mediator  
Graham Harman reinterpreted the book of Eric, McLuhan's son, and 
emphasized that “medium ” is both a thing and a mediator. Harman pointed out an 
Galkin D.V. , Weng Wei . The role of generative artificial intelligence in modern design  
32 important part in McLuhan's thought. Artists' creative use of old m edia may 
establish its meaning. In this sense, “delegation ” can be regarded as a special 
intermediary behavior. It establishes a relationship of entrusting and being 
entrusted between the subject and the object, thus influencing the way and result of 
the s ubject's action on the object. Through extended thinking on the concept of 
“intermediary ”, “delegation ” can be connected with speculative realism. However, 
the old media used by designers and artists are mostly static. There are also genetic 
artists who us e artificial hearts and blood to simulate the human body to trigger the 
emotions of the audience. But the media significance of generative AI has 
obviously exceeded that of general old media. It is untrue to say, according to the 
current threat hypothesis, that AI will replace mental labor. This is the reason why:  
The industrial revolution replaced manual production with machine 
production, which altered the relationship between humans and machines. In the beginning, humans had to screw; in the control of t he industrial era, humans 
controlled the machine; in the information age, humans designed complex automation procedures based on the industrial process, and these procedures instructed the machine to screw; in the intelligent era, humans instructed AI to 
manufacture A; AI used a database to calculate which components of A contained 
screws; therefore, the manufacturing process was likely to result in an event of screwing, and AI generated automation instructions to tell the machine to screw. 
This phenomenon suggests that the evolution of the link between humans and 
machines is moving from direct to indirect, and the ultimate objective of AI design 
is for it to become a human agent. And this strategy is consistent with evolutionary 
‘altruism’.  
Automation is re ally primarily an “interface problem, ” it's also an interface 
issue [15]. or the task of translating the output of human brain impulses into a form 
that computers can read and process automatically. The degree of automation 
difficulty for each connection is as follows: “man to man ” > “object to object”  > 
“man to object ” = “object to man. ” The more automation grows, the more similar 
the interfac e is and the more effectively the signal is sent. The significance of 
individuals in work is determined by their role in decision- making. The likelihood 
of AI replacing a given employment increases with its level of mediation. The 
distinctive social characteristics of people who live in groups make it impossible 
for robots to replace man -oriented employment at this time temporarily. We find 
that it is a challenge for AI to replace human- oriented employment since, up until it 
develops a cluster intelligence, it lacks any human social characteristics.  
Anything – whether it is an event or an act –can be counted as an object as 
long as it meets two simple criteria: (a) it is ontologically irreducible; it cannot be 
reduced downward  – “undermined"; (b) or reduced upward – “overmined". These 
two types are called undermining and overmining in OOO. More commonly, these two kinds of mining are combined, w hich is the so -called duomining [16. P. 50]. 
Real objects – as opposed to what we call sensual objects – can only be alluded to 
indirectly; they never take  on literal form, and need not even be physical. When a 
hammer is damaged, broken, or loses its normal function, sensory properties are 
redistributed from the sensory hammer to an unknown but real hammer that is 
deeper than the hammer we previously thought  we knew  [16. P. 152] . In terms of 
delegation issues, according to the train of thought of OOO, humans are on an 
equal footing with objects. Whether AI is regarded as a pure tool or a quasi -
Культурология, теория и история культуры / Culturology, the theo ry and cultural history  
33 companion, it should be considered as a hammer that may break or a non- human 
traitor may appear. Regar ding whether one can delegate power with confidence or 
not, the confidence or lack of confidence among humans can be equally transmitted 
to non- humans. There is no physical difference. OOO basically does not consider 
sociality, politics, and humanity, blur ring the distinction between humans and 
objects as well as agents.  
7. The delegation issue  
Before discussing the issue of non- human agents, we must clarify the specific 
meaning of delegation and what it implies for design. Delegation is the assignment 
of any responsibility  or authority to another person (normally from a manager to a  
subordinate) to carry out specific activities. The corresponding strategy is “Divide and Conquer” method. In this context, the subject of delegation is accountable; the 
subject can delegate tasks to others, but ultimately, the subject is responsible for 
the consequences of the delegated work. For example, project managers are generally only accountable for three aspects: “delivery time, ” “cost, ” and “quality. ” 
Assuming that the project is delayed due to the design time being too long, the 
project manager absolutely cannot shift the responsibility onto the design engineer; 
they can only say that the delay was caused by their own failure to prompt the 
design progress in a timely manner. If the design plan has issues that lead to project 
failure, the project manager is not accountable; instead, the responsibility falls on 
the design engineer.  
Therefore, the key responsibility of a design engineer is the proposal and 
design plan. After  clarifying the responsibilities of design engineers, take AI as an 
example to consider what role non- human agents should play in design work and 
what tasks can currently be delegated to them. The premise for discussing this 
issue should first clarify the capabilities that artificial intelligence currently 
possesses. Based on the level of abilities that non- human agents of artificial 
intelligence may exhibit now and, in the future, we can determine the scope of 
tasks that can be entrusted to it. 
Humans have  substantial plasticity. The majority of individuals in society are 
not specialists, but rather average citizens. An individual may remain in a specific position for a long time or may transition between jobs, careers, and 
roles.  Professions are diverse, w ith varying levels of entry requirements, but they 
are all built upon the foundational abilities of adults. The greatest success of 
general artificial intelligence is that it has made significant breakthroughs in 
mimicking basic human abilities. Several researchers from Google DeepMind have 
proposed a framework consisting of five progressively increasing levels of AI [17]. 
They classified through a matrix and believe that under the narrow definition of a 
clearly scoped task or set of tasks, existing AI product s have already covered levels 
0 to 5 (No AI, Emerging, Competent, Expert, Virtuoso, Superhuman). However, 
general artificial intelligence capable of a wide range of non -physical tasks, 
including metacognitive tasks like learning new skills, currently only reaches level 
2, with OpenAI being a representative. OpenAI executives have further categorized 
the levels of AGI. OpenAI believes its technology is approaching the second level 
of five on the path to artificial general intelligence. The third tier to AGI is 
“Agents ” (AI systems taking actions on a user's behalf for several days). Level 4 is 
AI with new innovations. The most advanced level is “Organizations.”  However, it 
Galkin D.V. , Weng Wei . The role of generative artificial intelligence in modern design  
34 should also be noted that whether current AI can take on the responsibilities and 
oblig ations of this position is still in question, as the ethics of AI as a constraint has 
yet to be established. 
Due to the significant enhancement of general capabilities, the cross -industry 
execution power of artificial intelligence has become more prominent . In 2019 
Harman put forward relevant viewpoints on “artificial non -intelligence ”. He 
believed that robots are more accurate in tasting and measuring red wine and can 
also print data, but the evaluations of sommeliers are full of poetry. At the same time, he emphasized that sommeliers are necessary. Although people hate wine-
tasting robots, what they really want is not an exhaustive analysis of the components of wine, but a poetic expression about wine, that is, non- intelligent 
feelings rather than intellig ent analysis. This is like drawing an unequal sign 
between artificial intelligence and poetry in advance. Until ChatGPT came out, the wine -tasting poems it writes may be better than those written by most sommeliers, 
although it may not have drunk wine. If a humanoid AI that cannot determine truth 
or falsehood holds a wine glass and expresses the same opinion, will you still question its taste and poetic nature? Obviously, we cannot blame Harman in 2019 
for seeing intelligence only as a component analyzer.  
Among human collectives, there are also quite a number of people who like to 
study the components of red wine rather than poeticize it. However, we will give 
them the identity of “wine chemical experts ” rather than “sommeliers ”. But we 
cannot say that chemi cal experts are non -intelligent. Therefore, our traditional 
expectations for the identity of intelligence are consistent with our inherent 
impressions of occupations. Harman's definition of an object. Object -oriented 
philosophy is based on two overlapping dualisms: object and property, reality and 
sense. An object is any unified entity, whether it is a reality existing in the world or 
existing in thought. The scope of philosophy must be broad enough to include two 
types of objects. The first type is called “real object ” or “thing ”. Real objects are 
autonomous forces in the world and exist even if observers die or are asleep. The 
second type is called “sensory object ”. Sensory objects exist only when the 
attention of an observer is directed at them. These observers need not be human.  
Harman's definition of an object is that which can escape or disappear from 
any relationship. His theory of independent transformation holds that real objects 
cannot be touched, exhausted, or directly known, so they can only be  known 
indirectly. Reality is never present. Objects are essentially non -relational in nature. 
At the relevant observational level, there is nothing in the world called a hammer. A hammer is an epistemological bubble of consciousness and not a hidden yet r eal 
agent that causes causal relationships. An AI is holding a hammer. The observer 
then becomes the AI. This has already realized the authorization of humans to non-
humans. 
8. From humanism to non -humanism  
The rise in complexity of the global economy and society since the 17 -th 
century has required more technological inventions to meet the needs of various 
segments of complex societies. Design is one of them. Raymond Williams, who 
expanded the field of cultural studies by defining culture in three dimensions: all 
human- made material and spiritual civilizations fall under the largest category; 
culture as a way of life falls into the middle category; and culture as literature and 
Культурология, теория и история культуры / Culturology, the theo ry and cultural history  
35 art falls into the smallest category. It is clear from the definition that desig n is 
dedicated to improving humankind's quality of life. It is obvious that it falls under 
the category of intermediate culture, acting as a link between literature and the arts and social civilization.  
At present, artificial intelligence is still developing continuously. Generative 
artificial intelligence, which represents a huge impact, has enormous potential in 
how it will empower thousands of industries. This also brings unprecedented 
opportunities and challenges to design research. There are no precedents to follow, 
no competitors to analyze, and no users to research. The established research 
paradigm needs to be reformed to adapt to the new research direction and requires 
entirely new design theories: new approaches and methods to support. The design 
community has deeply realized that the change has already arrived. 
Generative artificial intelligence has brought about significant changes in the 
field of design, with AI capable of generating text, images, and videos. AI has 
become an important pr oductive force in design, greatly enhancing its efficiency. 
Overall, the design in the intelligent era is characterized by the following features:  
For example, in the field of software engineering, methods may be used to 
design software systems. Agents can  be used to implement the functionality of a 
software system. Agents can improve the methods to make them more effective based on actual operation. First of all, there is deep human -computer collaboration. 
In the early days of computer -aided design, designers primarily “manipulated ” 
computers by adjusting relatively fixed elements within industrial software to assist 
in realizing their design ideas. In the era of generative intelligence, designers 
engage in multiple rounds of dialogue with AI, gradually ite rating and 
collaboratively refining design solutions. In this collaborative process, the role of 
the “machine”  has transformed into that of an “intelligent agent, ” which not only 
can recognize user intentions but also possesses the ability to active learni ng, make 
decisions, then execute actions. This kind of interaction allows designers and 
artificial intelligence to jointly become the subjects of creation, working hand in 
hand to drive innovation in design. 
Secondly, data has become the core resource of i ntelligent design. The training 
of artificial intelligence technology relies on data, especially in machine learning's 
deep learning models, which require vast amounts of data to recognize patterns and 
extract features. For example, user data is regarded as the foundation for analyzing user needs and plays a crucial role in design decisions. By utilizing artificial 
intelligence technology to real -time access and analyze vast amounts of user 
behavior data, we can further enhance the ability to analyze complex data, thereby 
providing users with large -scale and personalized experiences that more 
comprehensively meet people's diverse needs. Once again, a systematic innovation model. In the course of over a hundred years of development, the focus of design 
has ex panded beyond just innovating specific products or services to encompass 
systematic innovation, strategically addressing problems.  
Nowadays, many new definitions of design prominently emphasize the 
systematic nature of design. Artificial intelligence provides powerful analytical and 
generative capabilities, in certain fields, it has already removed the technical 
limitations on design, providing the conditions for design to participate in system -
level tasks, and at the same time putting forward higher requir ements for design 
innovation. 
Galkin D.V. , Weng Wei . The role of generative artificial intelligence in modern design  
36 Thirdly, data quality determines generation quality. However, data does not 
necessarily have to be collected with humans as the center. The advantages of 
artificial intelligence generation lie in quantity and speed. Works gene rated by 
artificial intelligence exhibit a certain degree of randomness and unpredictability, 
but this does not mean they are uncontrollable. Designers should fully understand 
the logic of computation and grasp its characteristics in order to fully leverage 
artificial intelligence as a collaborative entity.  
Although achieving high- quality design has traditionally relied on the 
aesthetic experience, judgment, and specific execution of designers as a guarantee of good results, this understanding is now being broken through by non-
anthropocentric practices. For example: AI -assisted scientific paper illustration 
creation begins with AI analyzing hundreds of illustration designs. The results revealed a strategic approach to image design, enabling intelligent creative 
proposals. Several rounds of dialogue revised the design requirements. Many 
reference intention images were generated during text -image cross -training, which 
completed the image design and helped the paper's illustrations meet popular 
science standard s. A high- quality data repository is the cornerstone of artificial 
intelligence applications. In the practical application of AI, industries are increasingly inclined to use small models tailored for specific fields. The 
performance of these models largely  depends on the availability of high- quality 
datasets. Moreover, the originality of design is crucial. For research and 
development institutions, establishing a design data resource library with 
independent intellectual property rights is a fundamental tas k. The resource library 
should contain a rich variety of high- quality design works, covering multiple styles 
and elements, and have a clear structure with detailed annotations, such as style tags and emotion tags, to support the breadth, depth, and accurac y of machine 
learning. 
Conclusion  
At present, artificial intelligence has penetrated every aspect of content 
production. The training data it uses not only determines the quality of the design 
but also relates to cultural autonomy and safety. Currently, so me widely used 
image generation tools often lack cultural elements specific to certain regions in their datasets, resulting in numerous inaccuracies and low quality in the content 
generated that is related to those specific regional cultures. When building  a design 
data resource library focused on the traditional cultural content of a specific region, 
it should comprehensively include the core elements, cultural symbols, and cultural 
images of that region's culture. At the same time, it is essential to emph asize the 
accuracy of the data and the depth of cultural aspects, clearly labeling the cultural 
connotations and characteristics behind the data to ensure the cultural relevance 
and accuracy of the generated content.  
Contemporary design is actively involve d in addressing issues such as 
collaboration, convenience, communication, and environmental friendliness. The 
so-called formation of integrated innovation is design innovation carried out from 
the system level by comprehensively considering dimensions such as policy, art, 
technology, market, and culture. In response to the traditional human- centered 
design concept, OOO provides a relatively new and more comprehensive 
perspective in the humanities field from the perspective of ontological philosophy. 
Культурология, теория и история культуры / Culturology, the theo ry and cultural history  
37 Firstly , AI can learn aesthetics and principles from vast data and create high -
quality designs, not just rely on quantity and speed. Secondly, AI can develop its 
own aesthetic sense and offer novel perspectives. Finally, with technological progress, AI is increasingly capable of specific execution and can even optimize 
designs for manufacturing. Thus, high- quality design isn't solely guaranteed by 
human designers.  
Facing the application of new technologies such as artificial intelligence, 
designers should not only  consider the products and services formed by them, but 
also consider the application scenarios and industrial ecology. Through delegating power to AI, a new thinking space can be created to a certain extent. For example.  
The San Francisco -based startup Skyfire is committed to becoming the Alipay 
in the AI world. It has received $8.5 million in seed round financing. Its goal is to build a global payment network and achieve fully autonomous transactions, serving 
AI agents and other services. The company has launched a globally universal 
payment protocol. It has technologies such as an automatic budget and control system, agent ID and historical verification system, etc., allowing users to recharge AI agents through traditional banks or stablecoins.  
The introduction of relevant policies and the exploration of AI governance 
practices are in a symbiotic state. For example, in November 2021, UNESCO of 
the United Nations adopted the world's first AI ethics agreement, the 
“Recommendation on the Ethics of Artificial Intelligence. ” On December 12, 2023, 
the artificial intelligence advisory body established by the UN Secretary -General 
released the interim report “Governing AI for Humanity.”  IBM participated in 
defining what AI governance is: refers to protective measures to ensure that AI tools and systems remain safe and comply with ethical standards.  
Relevant research institutions and industry organizations in China have put 
forward ethical guidelines and self -discipline conventions for AI one after another 
to provide  ethical guidance for enterprises' AI activities. Representatives include 
the “AI Industry Self -discipline Convention”  and “Trusted AI Operation 
Guidelines ” of the China Artificial Intelligence Industry Development Alliance 
(AIIA), the “Beijing Consensus on Artificial Intelligence ” and the “Declaration on 
the Responsibility of the Artificial Intelligence Industry ” of the Beijing Academy 
of Artificial Intelligence, and the “Practical Guide to Cybersecurity Standards – 
Guidelines for Preventing Ethical and Se curity Risks of Artificial Intelligence ” of 
the National Information Security Standardization Technical Committee.  
These frameworks inevitably still have regional and geopolitical requirements. 
However, apart from the restrictive meaning, we can also verif y whether the so -
called general artificial intelligence is truly general through different governance 
methods in different regions. 
Furthermore, combined with non- Western ideological texts, it is also possible 
to further explore the reinterpretation of loc al concepts of non- anthropocentrism. 
For example, when dialoguing with ancient Chinese scholars, there are also 
writings similar to object- oriented theory – Guo Xiang's theory of independent 
transformation “Return to and let things be according to their na ture, and the nature 
of things is naturally unified, so there is no specific trace to be found.”  “No one 
knows to return to unity to stop the traces, but only chases the traces to seek unity. The more one obtains the traces, the more one loses unity. This is truly a great 
mistake.” “Those who obtain it do not rely on the Tao externally and do not depend 
Galkin D.V. , Weng Wei . The role of generative artificial intelligence in modern design  
38 on themselves internally. They obtain it abruptly and transform independently.” 
“So, they are interdependent. Form and shadow are generated together. Even i f 
they are mysteriously merged again, it is not a matter of mutual dependence and 
waiting1.” 
Under the framework of OOO, break through the traditional design sense's 
understanding of objects. For example, events and performances, as long as they 
meet the d uomining conditions, all belong to the category of objects. Design is not 
a relationship entity between artistic philosophy and the real world. All designed 
artifacts have independent existence and agency. From a non- anthropocentric 
stance, object -oriented  ontology is based on the rejection of “correlationism. ” 
Originally, OOO starts design thinking from objects. For those who are firm 
believers in more traditional design levels, there is still some reluctance when 
facing non- mental objects. However, for non- human agents, when their potential 
simulated mental level gradually approaches that of humans (although we cannot 
simply equate IQ with mentality), the flexible application of OOO becomes even 
more urgent. In the research direction of human- computer inte raction, research on 
metaphor has become increasingly abundant in recent years. Some researchers, 
contrary to Norman's human -centered psychological -oriented approach [18],  
transform object -oriented ontology into an accessible form that can be used in 
desig n / research projects.  
In conclusion, design should ultimately maximize the brilliance of human -
centered people's lives regardless of specific circumstances. Humans' demand for novelty in their living spaces can be met by some inventive designs. In the 
traditional industrial paradigm, design tactics are determined by designers through 
manual research and aggregated summaries of user preferences. In complex 
cultures, humans and technology coexist, as indicated by eclecticism. The field of 
design synergy is becoming increasingly important. 
References  
1. McPherson, T.  (1965) Philosophy of Religion . Van Nostrand.  
2. Newell, A. & Simon, H.A. (1972) Human Problem Solving . Prentice -Hall.  
3. Simon, H.A. (1973) The structure of ill structured problems.  Artificial Intelligence . 4(3). 
pp. 181– 201. 
4. Huppatz, D. (2015) Revisiting Herbert Simon’s “science of design.” Design Issues . 31(2). 
pp. 29–40. 
5. Rittel, H.W. & Webber, M.M. (1973) Dilemmas in a general theory of planning. Policy Sci-
ences . 4(2). pp. 155 –169. 
6. Buchanan, R. (1992) Wicked problems in design thinking. Design Issues . 8(2). pp. 5 –21. 
7. Chomsky, N., Roberts, I. & Watumull, J. (2023) Noam Chomsky: the False Promise of 
ChatGPT: Opinion. New York Times . 8th March. [Online] Available from: 
https://www.nytimes.com/202 3/03/08/opinion/noam -chomsky -chatgpt -ai.html (Accessed: 13th Jan u-
ary 2025).  
8. Hinton, G. (2024) Will digital intelligence replace biological intelligence? [Online] Available 
from: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N1TEjTeQeg0 (Accessed: 15th January 2025).  
9. Searle, J. (2009) Chinese room argument. Scholarpedia. 4(8). pp. 3100.  
10. Lotman, Y.M., Uspensky, B.A. & Mihaychuk, G. (1978) On the semiotic mechanism of cul-
ture. New Literary History . 9(2). pp. 211– 232.  
11. Tamm, M. (2019) Introduction: Juri Lotman’s semiotic theory of history and cultural 
memory. In: Tamm, M. (ed.) Juri Lotman -Culture, Memory and History: Essays in Cultural Semiotics . 
Palgrave Macmillan Cham. pp. 1 –26.  
                            
1 By Guo Xiang who was a prominent Chinese philosopher of the Jin dynasty (266 -420 CE) and a key 
figure in interpreting the Daoist classic Zhuangzi.   
Культурология, теория и история культуры / Culturology, the theo ry and cultural history  
39 12. Lotman, Y.M. (2005) On the semiosp here. Σημειωτκή – Sign Systems Studies . 33(1). 
pp. 205– 229. 
13. Benini, A. & DeLeo, J.A. (1999) Rene Descartes’ physiology of pain. Spine. 24(20). 
pp. 2115.  
14. Hospers, J. (1961) Human Conduct: Problems of Ethics . Cengage Learning.  
15. Galkin, D.V. (2014 ) Osnovaniya sotsial'noy robototekhniki v kontekste sotsial'no-
gumanitarnykh issl edovaniy [Foundations of social robotics in the context of social and humanitarian 
research]. Vestnik Omskogo universiteta . 2(72). pp. 167– 177. 
16. Harman, G. (2018) Object -oriented ontology: a new theory of everything . Penguin UK.  
17. Morris, M.R., Sohl- Dickstein, J., Fiedel N. et al. (2023) Levels of AGI: operationalizing  
progress on the path to AGI . arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.02462.  
18. Coulton, P. & Lindley, J.G. (2019) More- than human centred design: considering other 
things. Design Journal . 22(4). pp. 463 –481. 
Information about authors:  
Galkin D.V.  – National Research Tomsk State University (Tomsk, Russian Federation ). E-mail: 
gdv_t@mail.ru  
Weng Wei  – National Research Tomsk State University (Tomsk, Russian Federation ). E-mail: 
vivianglia2022@outlook.com  
The authors declare no conflicts of interests . 
Сведения об авторах:  
Галкин Д.В . – доктор философских наук, профессор кафедры культурологии и музеол о-
гии Национального исследовательского Томского государственного университета  (Томск, 
Россия). E -mail: gdv_t@mail.ru  
Вэн Вэй  – аспирант кафедры культурологии и музеологии Национального исследовател ь-
ского Томского государственного университета (Томск, Россия).  E-mail: 
vivianglia2022@outlook.com  
Авторы заявляют об отсутствии конфликт а интересов.  
 
The article was submitted 10.02.2025;  
approved after reviewing 11.02.2025; accepted for publication 15.02.2025.  
Статья поступила в редакцию 10.02.2025;  
одобрена после рецензирования 11.02.2025; принята к публикации 15.02.2025.  
 
 
