Professional Development in Education
ISSN: 1941-5257 (Print) 1941-5265 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rjie20
What  is the machine? Teachers’ professional
learning about generative artiﬁcial intelligence as
tutors for children
Mary Rice, Nicholas DePascal, Joaquín T. Argüello de Jesús, Helen McFeely,
Amy Traylor & Lehman Heaviland
To cite this article: Mary Rice, Nicholas DePascal, Joaquín T. Argüello de Jesús, Helen McFeely,
Amy Traylor & Lehman Heaviland (2025) What  is the machine? Teachers’ professional learning
about generative artiﬁcial intelligence as tutors for children, Professional Development in
Education, 51:3, 418-433, DOI: 10.1080/19415257.2024.2407413
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/19415257.2024.2407413
Published online: 27 Sep 2024.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 595
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 6 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjie20
ARTICLE
What is the machine? Teachers’ professional learning about 
generative artificial intelligence as tutors for children
Mary Rice
 , Nicholas DePascal, Joaquín T. Argüello de Jesús, Helen McFeely, Amy Traylor 
and Lehman Heaviland
Language Literacy and Sociocultural Studies, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, USA
ABSTRACT
With the introduction of artificial intelligence (AI), particularly Generative 
AI (GenAI) to school settings, teachers are likely to be drawn into profes -
sional learning scenarios where they will be expected to learn how to use 
programs and applications for remediation and tutoring of children. 
Previous research highlights how professional learning for teachers 
about GenAI has been focused on gaining their acquiescence to using 
GenAI by arguing that it is both superior and inescapable. This critical 
posthuman work uses a professional learning scenario to ask questions 
about the historically present challenges of asking teachers to use GenAI 
as a universal good when this discourse has been used to colonise and 
imperialise in schools, particularly with technologies. Our critical posthu -
man diffractive reading revealed alternative encounters that teachers and 
students could have with GenAI and reasonable pathways for avoiding it. 
Implications of this work include a need to draw on the diffractive 
encounters presented here to understand and address who and what 
the machine is when it comes to adopting advanced technologies for 
various purposes in schools.ARTICLE HISTORY 
Received 10 June 2024  
Accepted 13 September 2024 
KEYWORDS 
Critical posthumanism; 
discourse analysis; Freirean 
dialogue; generative AI; 
Illich’s conviviality; 
professional learning for 
technologies
Educators are tasked with being and becoming within an increasingly complex assemblage for their 
profession (Mulcahy 2011 ). Such an assemblage includes application programs developed through 
machine learning and algorithms that are commonly called Artificial Intelligence (AI) (Rillig et al.  
2023 ). AI includes Chatbots and Large Language Models (LLM), which have a complex mathema -
tical architecture and have been trained using billions of words using natural language processing 
(Rillig et al. 2023 ). LLMs and Chatbots respond to user input and provide algorithmically generated 
outputs based on prompts that simulate conversation. Language translation and transcriptions of 
audio can also be achieved in this way (Rillig et al. 2023 ). In late 2022, the Generative Pretrained 
Transformer language (GPT) that produced communication closely resembling person-to-person 
dialogue came into public use (Rillig et al. 2023 ). Generative Artificial Intelligence (GenAI) is a term 
for programs and applications that use LLMs with GPT language (Hodges and Kirschner 2024 ). The 
pedagogical implications of GenAI technologies are speculative (Lim and Nicolaides 2024 ).
GenAI was not intended for education alone; it was pushed into multiple fields and disciplines 
and has been the subject of government and international inquiry. The United Nations Chief 
Executives Board for Coordination deliberated the ethical use of multiple forms of AI in 2022. The 
commission identified children rights to personal privacy and stated a need to revise internal 
procedures for data collection in government systems, including schools. Key directives from the 
CONTACT Mary Rice 
 maryrice@unm.edu 
 Language Literacy and Sociocultural Studies, University of New Mexico, 222 
Hokona Hall MSC05 3040, Albuquerque, NM 87131, USAPROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT IN EDUCATION   
2025, VOL. 51, NO. 3, 418–433 
https://doi.org/10.1080/19415257.2024.2407413
© 2024 International Professional Development Association (IPDA) 
commission regarding AI included the injunction to do no harm, provide clarity of purpose, ensure 
safety and security, practice fairness and non-discrimination, aim for environmental sustainability, 
preserve privacy rights, honour human autonomy, be transparent and forthright in explanations to 
constituents, practice responsibility and accountability, and invite participation using inclusive 
approaches to AI use (United Nations System, Chief Executives Board for Coordination 2022 ).
The infusion GenAI into education in the United States and in other countries required school 
leaders to decide how to provide professional learning to teachers about GenAI alongside other 
forms of AI when neither teachers nor leaders had familiarity or technical expertise (Bower et al.  
2024 ). When US President Joe Biden released an executive order with mandates for ethical AI in 
October 2023, the effort was primarily aimed at protecting business and military interests. For 
schools, there was a vague call to use AI to personalise learning:
Shape AI’s potential to transform education by creating resources to support educators deploying AI- 
enabled educational tools, such as personalized tutoring in schools. (The White House 2023 , emphasis in the 
original)
Discourses for personalized learning in US educational parlance are a common refrain for educa -
tional technology vendors. The use of the term has been criticised for being more focused on 
capitalism than student learning (Arnesen et al. 2019 , Boninger et al. 2019 ). While it is true that 
executive orders in the US government are among the weaker methods for making policy at the 
national level, this initial order offers insight into federal policy priorities and the deference that is 
afforded to educational technologies in US schools.
The infusion of GenAI in schools also came amid a host of unresolved and largely unaddressed 
tensions in school systems around historically present inequities (Brayboy 2005 , Mills 1997 , 
Calderón et al. 2012 ). Racism is a technology. Racism uses technologies to ensure that inequities 
can persist, with minimal to no challenges (Benjamin 2019 ). Racism permeates the discourse of 
technological uptake where teachers have been required to use other technologies as universal 
goods in the name of economic and social progress (Knox 2013 ). The call for universal goods for 
universal progress has been used to colonise, erase local and indigenous knowledges, and justify 
environmental degradation (Mills 1997 ).
Universalist policy has been particularly devastating to those who have been Black(end) to gain 
access to their labour and/or who have been otherwise displaced and (de)humanised because their 
land was needed for progress (Smith et al. 2012 ). The historically present effects are that children 
from excluded groups and/or who have physical, cognitive, or other differences with implications 
for their learning are positioned as having deficits within educational spaces by the very technol -
ogies that are handed to teachers to serve them (Morris 2020 , Ricaurte et al. 2024 ). For many 
communities, there is also a pressing existential threat in the loss of lands that become ghosts and/or 
the poisoning of the land into monsters through technological damage and waste associated with 
GenAI and related technologies (Tsing et al. 2017 ).
Because text generation is a primary function of GenAI, its use to support writing in education 
settings garnered attention (Brassington et al. 2024 ). Recent studies of GenAI for teachers’ profes -
sional learning reflect its imposition as a requirement unless and until they acquiesce. Kaplan- 
Rakowski et al. (2023 ) surveyed teacher interest for using GenAI and found that the more teachers 
used it, the more amenable they were to use it more often. Similarly, Baidoo-Anu and Ansah (2023 ) 
found that teachers in Ghana hesitated to use GenAI but were persuaded to do so because they were 
convinced to regard GenAI as inevitable as part of professional learning. Similarly, prospective 
teachers in China were more positive about learning mathematical concepts when using GenAI 
than traditional methods because of a sense that technology is universally an advancement (Lu et al.  
2024 ). In Israel, Nazaretsky et al. (2022 ) argued it was important to gain teachers’ trust by sharing 
how GenAI worked. What the researchers meant by how AI worked was to convince teachers during 
professional learning that the AI graders’ judgement was better than theirs. Finally, Velander et al. 
(2024 ) worried that teachers’ emotional responses would complicate the ability of schools to impose PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT IN EDUCATION
 419
GenAI for teaching. In these studies, the inevitability of GenAI for economic and social progress 
was touted as universally superior and universally necessary.
Professional learning for teachers in the US and other countries has been especially likely to 
respond to interests of economic and social profit; GenAI has even been described as key for 
employment prospects for teachers, job skills for students, and part of keeping current in society 
(Bower et al. 2024 ). It is unclear how the United Nations System, Chief Executives Board for 
Coordination (2022 ) principles of ethics, privacy, and protection for people and environment could 
play a role or how seriously that role would be taken considering the host of extant unaddressed 
issues of equity in schools globally. While it is possible to conceptualise the use of advanced 
technologies within local realities, such as land/water, and not assume deficit perspectives for 
children and communities, to do so would require considerable reimagining and (re)narrating to 
move beyond universalising influences (Rice and Argüello de Jesús 2024 ).
For this paper, we drew on critical posthumanist thinking to create a space for multiple 
possibilities through diffraction (Barad 2007 ). This activity explored emerging issues for teachers’ 
professional learning about students positioned as needing GenAI tutoring. To share this work, we 
first elaborate on our understanding of colonialist structures in schools. Then we outline the 
posthumanist ways of knowing that supported our thinking about how GenAI would be used for 
professional learning. Next, we present an Assemblage-as-Narrative that we co-constructed. We 
learned from it using diffraction as reading-through to understand possible responses to the 
Assemblage-as-Narrative. We end by sharing key learnings along with wonderings about research 
and practice.
Conceptual framing
The conceptual framing for this work has two major sections. The first section critically positions 
US schools by explaining how the so-called neutrality in school spaces reflects a long-standing racial 
social contract that relies on leaving some groups (de)humanised (e.g. Mills 1997 ). The second part 
moves to the posthumanist explanations that guided this work as situated in technofeminism (e.g. 
Barad 2007 ). These explanations demonstrated how we disoriented the hierarchies between Beings 
and instead, framed these relationships as entanglements between humans and (non)humans to do 
our diffractive exercise.
Critically framing school settings
We trace our critical position regarding US schooling through the social contract that early US 
colonial governing entities agreed to, and which has persisted to current times (Mills 1997 ). The 
contract was stratified politically and socially based on race and gender, named property holders 
and what constituted property, and then guarded by merging it with the local moral code so that all 
behaviours could be strictly regulated (Mills 1997 ). The contract functioned as a series of individual 
(in)formal (meta)agreements whereby non-White peoples were designated to have inferior social 
and moral status (Mills 1997 ). This status emerged as a Chain of Being where Man was at the top, 
followed by animals, and then stones – or things which were not living (Jackson 2020 ). Crucial to 
the Chain of Being was that the designation of Man was exclusive to White-ness. As Mills (1997 ) 
wrote, ‘when they wrote justice, they meant just us’ (p. 110).
As Man, White peoples could arrange systems to dominate and maintain power over non-White 
peoples through labels that connotated less human-ness, such as beast or savage (Jackson 2020 ). The 
racial and ethnic stratification has been maintained through elaborate myths – as well as terms and 
labels – disguised in institutions as colorblind ideology (Carr 1997 , Bonilla-Silva 2021 ). Both overt 
and subtle forms of racism continue through institutionalised values that rely on such universalism, 
along with naming others as inferior, while denying that privilege exists (Mohanty 2003 , Brayboy  
2005 , Arvin et al. 2013 ).420
 M. RICE ET AL.
The universalism that emanates from the social contract within institutions advances imperialist 
goals of consumerism, competition, rationalism, detachment, individualism, and narcissism; in 
turn, ecological philosophy and consciousness in schools is impeded (Cajete 2000 ). It is difficult to 
question historically present abusive relationships with lands/water when prioritising technological 
integration (Wall Kimmerer 2013 ). Moreover, Western science is often presented as abstraction 
that psychologically disassociates people from nature (Cajete 2000 , Wall Kimmerer 2013 ). Although 
US educational systems have been dismissive of land/water/body connections, they have also 
invested huge financial resources in removing Indigenous children from their families to steal 
land (Haaland and Newland 2022 ). These histories of dispossession position GenAI within 
a complex chaos that, if not well-considered, could be yet another so-called universal good for 
universal progress from which harmed groups must survive and heal (Forbes 2008 , Wall Kimmerer  
2013 ). Thus, while forging a Chain of Being where humans, animals, and stones (i.e. (non)living) 
was intended to Black(en) some individuals and justify violence against even more peoples, we take 
a view where human, plant, animal, and spirit hold possibilities for mutual reciprocities (Cajete  
2000 ). There are not unlimited (non)human resources for technological output for humans. There 
are not unlimited humans as resources.
Posthumanism
The post-human project rejects Man. Many contemporary feminisms (e.g. ecofeminism) have 
already rejected the right of Man to access the bodies of all living entities (Braidotti 2019 ). This 
tradition aligns with techno-teratological thinking (Kristeva 1980 , Barr 1987 , Haraway 1992 , 
Braidotti 2002 , Creed 1993 ). Such alliances coalesced around solidarities of women – or others of 
‘Man’ – and non-humans (animals, insects, plants, trees, viruses, fungi, bacteria and technol 
(Biological automata)) (Braidotti 2019 , p. 39). However, there is more to be done than reject the 
hierarchy between Man and (non)human; we must critically engage with what it means to Be in any 
biopolitical context (Mohanty 2003 , Jackson 2020 ). There is not just a crisis of what it means to be 
a human, but there is a ‘failed praxis of being’ (Jackson 2020 , p. 15). To understand Being or more 
accurately in post-human thinking, Becoming , two principles – intra-active entanglement and 
diffraction are useful.
Intra-active entanglement
Posthumanism carries a relational understanding of events and ideas as being intra-actively 
entangled (Barad 2007 ). Such relationality means that all being and doing affects other matter 
(Cajete 2000 ). Hierarchy or linearity are absent in such on-going becoming. Therefore, finding 
directionality for power is not useful; we also must think about what the power is doing – like 
ripples in a pond when a stone is thrown in. Because power has no direction and structure, terms 
like oppression and resistance are both affect, or ways of becoming.
Diffraction
Diffraction supports our understanding of Becoming. As an ocular metaphor, diffraction differs 
from reflection in that it does not require an exact replica. Diffraction prefers differences – ripples – 
materialities that have effects that can be seen (Fox and Allred 2017 ). Differences might also be 
thought of as manifestations or animations of spirit (Cajete 2000 ). To think diffractively instead of 
reflectively, readers engage multiple discourses simultaneously (Merten 2021 ). Discourse can 
emerge from words, the typical linguistic discourse, as well as through visualisation and sound as 
creative acts. We wanted to experience ourselves as being involved a phenomenon and consider 
how our attention to it as researchers were part of the entanglement that shifts both our becomings 
and the becomings of other materialities. The goal of diffraction is to gain insight and learn to think 
about materialities (i.e. differences that make a difference), their relationships, and experience 
interconnectedness (Cajete 2000 ).PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT IN EDUCATION
 421
Methodology
Our research design assumed an intra-active relationship between ourselves and the phenomenon 
of professional learning about GenAI amid a complicated assemblage (Barad 1996 ). We engaged 
moved from epistemological positions towards understandings about the relationships of things in 
the world (Fox and Allred 2017 ). The work of engaging together resulted in the entangled, inwoven 
becomings (Cajete 2000 , Wall Kimmerer 2013 ).
Assemblage-as-narrative
To initiate this work, we captured an assemblage of considerations that we wanted to discuss as 
a narrative. Considerations emerged from research about GenAI and professional learning along -
side practical concerns from living in our communities as teachers, teacher educators, and staff 
developers. Precedent for emblematic narratives in research exists (Mishler 1990 ). Scholars like 
Bullough and Pinnegar (2001 ) developed guidelines for using autobiography to identify new 
insights about research. Clandinin and Connelly (1986 ) and Clandinin (1989 ) also used teachers’ 
stories as professional knowledge. Within narrative inquiry methodology, conceptualised fictiona -
lisation techniques to combine narratives, increase salience, and preserve privacy and confidenti -
ality in research (Caine et al. 2017 ). Using these techniques and guidelines, we assembled a story 
about ourselves that included personal practical knowledge(s) so that we could then draw it out 
again diffractively using a multiplicity of theories and thinking tools. In this way, we drew on local 
places and epistemologies to allow a story to find us amid our inquiry (Cajete 2000 , Wall Kimmerer  
2013 ).
Such an Assemblage-as-narrative consisted of bodies and abstractions that were caught up in 
a moment of social inquiry (Fox and Allred 2017 ). In this case, that social inquiry was professional 
learning about GenAI for schoolteachers. The critical elements of this Assemblage-as-story were:
Central administration—able gaze (special educational services)—monolingualism—writing instruction— 
required professional development sessions—GenAI as a solution.
Once we had developed the Assemblage-as-narrative, we set to tracing.
Doing diffractive tracings
For analysis, we engaged in a process of diffractive tracing (Barad 2007 ). For tracing, it was important 
to consider what other theories and theorists we wanted to think with. In thinking with, we are not 
engaging in a comparison, but rather setting up a relationship between texts where insights come from 
using language from various thinkers to yield interesting ideas. The theories and ideas for thinking with 
were selected based on their differences from one another in space and time and in sharing borders 
with, but also being distinct from the criticalities that we described at the beginning of the paper. By 
drawing on various theories, we were able to create space for diffractive knowings and be subject to 
vulnerabilities that come with collective sense-making. Four researchers wrote an initial response to the 
Assemblage-as-Narrative and then received responses from the lead author with reference to the 
critical posthuman framing. The four types of theories were (1) linguistic positioning theories (2) 
critical humanism (3) radical polemics, and (4) community-engaged praxis. As a group, we used 
language and terms from each other’s responses to make connections by placing words in proximity to 
one another. Figure 1 contains an example from reading Assemblage-as-Narrative through positioning 
theories where we were working with foundational ideas from Wittgenstein et al. (2009 ).
We recognise that the report of a hybrid assemblage is an affect economy; researchers 
become during the work. We acknowledge our roles in the machine of this research (Fox 
and Allred 2017 ). Further, we understand that the conception, activity, writing and repre -
sentation of this work varies from traditional research papers; we did this deliberately to 422
 M. RICE ET AL.
challenge how research is conceptualised for publication. We do not misunderstand how 
research is supposed to look . We point to previously published work in this journal by 
Strom (2021 ) and others as examples of such variation in posthuman, and new/neo-material 
framing.
Diffractively Reading-Through Assemblage-as-Narrative
Below is the Assemblage-as-Narrative that we developed. Then, we present four perspec -
tives. In the discussion section, we create a new assemblage of ideas from the diffractive 
process.
Central administration recently announced a new initiative to support secondary student writing development that 
will begin next week. ‘This exciting new program will focus on students identified with special educational needs 
and students who speak languages other than English or forms of English that are less preferred by our valued local 
employers. To make the most efficient use of your precious instructional time, Artificial Intelligence tools (AI) will 
be used to provide feedback on student writing. All teachers are required to four attend professional learning 
sessions about (1) what standardized essay prompts to give students, (2) how to use AI prompt engineering to elicit 
feedback for students, (3) how to evaluate the quality of feedback on students’ essays and what to require students to 
address, (4) and how to use AI detection software to decide when students are using AI to write their compositions. 
We look forward to learning with you!’
Language GamesDiscourse of 
ErasureDialogue's role 
in makin g 
Forms  of Life
Ethics of 
Language
Solutionism 
Discourse over 
ConvivialityLanguage-
supported 
Isomorphi smFigure 1. Diffractive tracing example.PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT IN EDUCATION
 423
Diffracting through positioning theories
The first set of theories we considered focused on linguistic positioning. Schools are massive 
bureaucratic machines, ‘highly structured organizational fields . . . in which individual efforts to 
deal rationally with uncertainty and constraint often lead, in the aggregate, to homogeneity in 
structure, culture, and output’ (DiMaggio and Powell 1983 , p. 147). The preference for conformity 
does not occur because it makes institutions more efficient, but because of political influence, 
uncertainty in technology and/or environment, and professionalisation (DiMaggio and Powell  
1983 ). As current concerns about test score improvements and market competitiveness become 
political imperatives, technology developers offer solutions to problems. Decisions to use GenAI 
‘involve managerial behaviors at the level of taken-for-granted assumptions rather than consciously 
strategic choice’ (DiMaggio and Powell 1983 , p. 149). Positioning theory and Wittgenstein’s et al. 
(2009 ) concepts of ‘language-games,’ can bring new insights.
The term language-game describes how ‘the speaking of language is part of an activity, or of 
a form of life,’ which includes, ‘[g]iving orders, or acting on them . . . [r]eporting an event . . . [g] 
uessing riddles,’ among others (Wittgenstein et al. 2009 , p. 15). Games suggest rules, but rather than 
seeking rules, we should ‘see a complicated network of similarities overlapping and crisscrossing: 
similarities in the large and in the small’ (Wittgenstein et al. 2009 , p. 36). Word meanings depend 
on the games in which they are used and the rules of those games. Thus, a form of life is the culture 
or aspect of living a group takes on, and the linguistic forms used to describe and prescribe it. These 
forms of life provide the ‘judgements that [are] required for communication by means of language’ 
(Wittgenstein et al. 2009 , p. 94). Forms of life that groups assume are, in part, an ethic that positions 
them in relation to various moral orders. Schools are sites for such complex language-games. Since 
rules are open to interpretation, social practices embody rules. In the Assemblage-as-Narrative, 
central administration and the valued local employers are social formations that matter. The central 
administration defined the social practices, while teachers were simultaneously ordered and 
cozened to uncritically accept GenAI into teaching practices.
Building on Wittgenstein’s et al. (2009 ) concept of language-games, positioning theory offers 
deeper considerations of implicit and explicit power relations. Positioning ‘is the discursive process 
whereby selves are located in conversations as observably and subjectively coherent participants in 
jointly produced storylines’ (Davies and Harré 1990 , p. 48). Because ‘[a] conversation unfolds 
through the joint action of all participants as they make – or attempt to make – their own and each 
other’s actions socially determinate’ (Davies and Harré 1990 , pp. 45–46), conversations flow to and 
from the personal to the cultural, and through discourse to create ‘overlapping moral orders’ which 
‘can be regarded as sets of rights and duties created by declarations with deontic powers’ (van 
Langenhove 2017 , p. 4). Thus, ‘all social structures can be regarded as moral orders that set out the 
rules for appropriate behavior,’ and ‘constitute the invisible moral space that surrounds people at all 
times’ (van Langenhove 2017 , p. 3, 6).
The Assemblage-as-Narrative represents several moral orders that positioned teachers and 
students in ways that denies them agency and installed GenAI as arbiters of their relationships. 
In the first two sentences, the new initiative is described as exciting and acknowledges teachers’ 
precious instructional time , positing the use of GenAI as a benefit for teachers. However, the fact 
that GenAI will be used, and the requirement that is established for all teachers to attend profes -
sional learning on the implementation of GenAI, positions teachers as duty-bound to accept use 
and required training without question. Students’ forms of life are positioned as deficient with a 
need to be corrected in line with the preferences of the valued local employers . The institutional 
moral order of the school, the established language-games formed already, the relationships and 
ways of interacting that teachers and students have already developed to facilitate learning, collide 
with the ethic of capitalism, where students are positioned for their value as future workers; 
students’ own desires are subsumed in implicit duties to adopt forms of life that satisfy those 
they hope will hire them later (van Langenhove 2017 ).424
 M. RICE ET AL.
The topics of the four required professional learning sessions positioned teachers and students in 
opposition to one another under an ethic of simplifying the learning process. The standardised 
prompts of the first session position teachers as test proctors whose professional knowledge of their 
students is irrelevant. Students are positioned as passive patients being administered a remedy. 
The second and third sessions position teachers as GenAI functionaries who mediate between 
GenAI and students. Again, teacher expertise is positioned as beneath GenAI, and as part of the 
imperative to meet the needs of local employers, with an added absurdity. Instead of responding 
directly to students, teachers instead administrate feedback provided by GenAI. In another absurd -
ity, the fourth session positions teachers as policers of student GenAI use through use of AI 
detection software, even though GenAI has been used to engineer prompts and evaluate student 
writing. While GenAI are positioned as a relief to teacher workload, they create more teacher work 
and position students for inevitable punishment. Instead of facilitating an ethical relationship 
between teachers and students, GenAI – as intended to be implemented by the district – create 
an antagonistic relationship. Further, central administration may be adopting GenAI without first 
learning how GenAI works or considering the range of ethical implications. Overall, the language 
game of this Assemblage-as-Narrative is one where instead of facilitating an ethical relationship 
between teachers and students, GenAI implementation stands to engender agonism.
Diffracting through critical humanism
The second set of theories were grounded in critical humanism. One might expect that critical 
humanist Paulo Freire would have no issues with GenAI in education. Freire recognised the 
importance of using technological advances (Jandrić 2021 ). Freire (2021b ) confirmed that educa -
tion ‘involves processes, techniques, expectations, desires, frustrations, and the ongoing tension 
between practice and theory’ (p. 113). Freire’s philosophies accommodate structured teaching 
approaches (Chambers 2019 ).
Freire’s educational philosophy regarding writing developed during his exile from Brazil, while 
he worked in Chile (Gadotti and Torres 2009 ). Freire taught adults who had been denied educa -
tional opportunities. Current educational landscapes continue to leave out and classify students in 
a similar manner (Evans et al. 2021 ). These are students with various physical, cognitive, learning, 
language, and cultural differences.
In the Assemblage-as-Narrative, efficiency is prioritised. Freire’s ideas are inefficient. In 
Education for Critical Consciousness , Freire (2008 ) dispelled the complaints to his view of education 
as ‘time wasting’ (p. 105). According to Freire (2008 ), time required for teachers and students to 
interact through authentic dialogue was never a waste of time. Time for dialogue is time spent in 
a life giving activity that Freire contrasted with oppressive educators who ‘in-animate’ everything’ 
(Freire 2006 , p. 59).
Dialogue was Freire’s essential mode for student–teacher interaction, feedback, and teaching. 
For Freire (2006 ), dialogue-centred relationships equalised power between student and teacher. 
Teacher feedback must be ‘with ’ the student (p. 93). Freire emphasised this point by with italics. 
Professional learning for GenAI may be consistent with Freirean dialogue when feedback from 
GenAI is used with the students, and not in place of this interaction between students and teachers.
Freire would disagree with requiring all teachers to attend professional learning. Freire’s (2006 ) 
entire educational philosophy prized freedom. ‘Manipulation, sloganizing, depositing,’ regimenta -
tion, and prescription cannot be components of revolutionary praxis’ (Freire 2006 , p. 126). If 
professional learning followed Freirean principles much of it would be disqualified. In Freire’s later 
work, he exchanged the word oppression for invader . ‘The invader dictates; the invaded patiently 
accept what is dictated’ (Freire 2008 , p. 103).
The ethos of the Assemblage-as-Narrative indicates that standardised prompts will be used for 
writing. In Freire’s dialogic view, there should be no standardised prompts because writing ought to 
develop organically from worlds and lives of students. In Freire’s (2021a ) Pedagogy in Process: Letter PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT IN EDUCATION
 425
to Guinea-Bissau , he explained the need for cultural awareness of the adult learner’s world. Freire 
wrote that literacy education ‘can never be looked at in isolation’ (p. 63). Generic prompts that are 
not based in the existential worlds of the students are not dialogic.
Freire’s ideas about quality in education are based on its ability to liberate and transform the 
human and the human’s environment. Freire (2006 ) recommended praxis (p. 87). As dialogue 
equalises power, Freire’s praxis is sharing of power between human acts and human reflection. 
Human action without reflection is mere ‘activism’ (p. 65). Reflection on its own is simply 
‘verbalism’ (p. 87) where words are produced to satisfy the institution’s need for documentation. 
For quality writing experiences, the goal should be to cause transformation. For praxis , Freire 
demands that work, such as writing, should be coupled with authentic dialogue towards the goal of 
conscientization . Also, Freire (2008 ) cautioned that ‘there should be no exclusive support for either 
‘technology’ or for ‘humanity’” (p. 114). In the Assemblage-as-Narrative, technology has been 
divided from humanity in that it makes teachers and students more beholden to others (e.g. 
employers) rather than freer.
Freire’s (2006 ) conscientization invites trust. A teacher’s ‘efforts must be imbued with 
a profound trust in people and their creative power’ (Freire 2006 , p. 75). In the Assemblage-as- 
Narrative, the central administration’s plan seems guaranteed to engender an atmosphere of low 
trust between the administration and the teachers, and between the teachers and the students. For 
Freire (2006 ) ‘it is necessary to trust in the oppressed and in their ability to reason’ (p. 66). In the 
Assemblage-as-Narrative, it is not only the students who are oppressed by the system. The teachers 
are not trusted either. The teachers are oppressed, commanded with no options, not spoken with , 
and denied opportunities for transformation that lead to freedom.
Diffracting through conviviality
The third set of theories focused on radical polemics. Technologies do not operate separately from 
human creators. In 1770, a Hungarian inventor built an intricate mechanical chess player because of 
the assumption that chess operated as a Western instrument to measure intellect. The inventor 
tricked the royal court into thinking that a wooden construction could win at chess; in reality, there 
was an expert chess player inside the apparatus playing incognito (Crawford 2022 ). A central part of 
the story is how the inventor was attempting to assert a particular narrative about technology’s role 
in determining intellect, but that narrative was built at least partially on deception and illusion. It 
was also built on the presumption that skill at a cultural construct – the game of chess – is what does 
and should constitute intelligence.
In the Assemblage-as-Narrative where teachers need to learn to use GenAI to serve student 
writers, there are cultural narratives operating about universally good writing. For example, making 
letters in elegant cursive script was once considered a hallmark of intelligence (Fox 2014 ). What are 
contemporary signifiers of intellect that are believed to be universal , but are culturally coded? How 
have these crept into corpuses that have been stolen by LLMs for GPT technologies? There are also 
tensions around how much children and teachers should play with technology versus learn with it. 
Chess is a game. Or is it practice for logical thinking? An opportunity to learn patience? An exercise 
in non-violent aggression? When children in Paraguay and their teachers were given laptops and 
they wanted to use them for what researchers called recreation, this was considered a failure 
(Broussard 2019 ). We ask: why do the researchers have the right to determine what is learning 
and what is play in the classroom space?
Such circumstances raise important questions about the seeming need in the Assemblage-As- 
Narrative to prepare teachers to use GenAI properly to ensure that teachers use technologies 
with students only for purposes that are evaluative and remedial so that students can replicate 
universally good writing. Such a need is not reflective of how technologies are used outside of 
school. Illich (1975 ) suggested that technology’s primary purposes should be to promote 
a conviviality where people come together to share joy. This is not to say that students and 426
 M. RICE ET AL.
teachers could not enjoy writing together where they identified areas for improvement, but 
historically, that is not how interventions have operated. Instead, technologies are used to do to, 
or do for the students, rather than doing with them.
One way to know whether there is a convivial intention of the project proposed by central 
administration in the Assemblage-as-Narrative is whether and how much they ‘restrict 
personal autonomy’ of teachers and students (Illich 1975 , p. 64). There is little room for 
teacher and student decision making, especially since there is not even the choice of whether 
to attend the sessions. There is also no space for thinking about the amount of time spent 
using digital tools and whether that is best use of time for young people and teachers. Framing 
professional learning for GenAI might be a proposition framed around what Lee (2021 ) 
described as a symbiosis between humans and machines. Using GenAI as an instructional 
convivial tool would provide opportunities for growth, creativity, and inspiration. Shifting 
from a tutorial or remedial purpose to a pedagogical purpose opens the space to work 
convivially with GenAI.
While we may not be able to escape the entanglement of technologies with our bodies and our 
lives, Illich (1975 ) warned of the dangers when machines have priority: ‘When people become 
obsolete and need constantly to renew their educational security, when the accountant must be 
reprogrammed for each new generation of computers, then learning has indeed become scarce’ 
(p. 72). Radical polemics asks school leaders to consider the needs of children and families over the 
needs of those who are promoting GenAI.
Diffracting through community-engaged praxis
The last set of theories focus on community-engaged praxis. Choosing educational tools is 
a political act. Tools reflect the beliefs and desires of their makers; they are algorithmic mediations 
of social relations (Ziarek 2022 ). Cultural tools reproduce themselves, so it matters which tools we 
choose just as it matters whose stories tell stories (Haraway 2019 ). Choosing to narrate an agent as a 
tool is also an social and political act (Harari, 2024 ). The underlying technologies used to create 
GenAI systems is distributed knowledge across various individuals. AI-enabled algorithms might be 
recast as lumps of clay. Whereas GenAI emerged from militarism and patriarchal capitalism, 
algorithmic clay as biological material defies its origins and can be welcomed as collaborator 
(Haraway 2019 ).
GenAI could be a collaborator to create and make with personal and cultural empowerment. 
Making with entangles temporalities and spatialities as intra-active entities-in assemblages. 
Together, these are more-than-human, other-than-human, inhuman, and human-as-humus 
(Haraway 2019 ). A community-based perspective shifts conversation to in the direction of make- 
with .
For example, the free and open software movement (FOSS) has existed since the 1980s 
(Gonzalez-Barahona 2021 ). Yet, FOSS has no hold in K-12 education. Since 2008 professor and 
creative computing researcher Rebecca Fiebrink has been offering Wekinator software. Before 
Fiebrink, there was already a burgeoning field of open source coding tools built for non- 
programmers. When designing with open-source programs called Processing, p5.js, and the 
Wekinator, students and teachers also have opportunities for a more collaborative ethos. Not all 
open-source projects are as explicitly inclusive as the Processing and p5.js coding community, but 
their shared community statement provides an example of the philosophies typical to open-source 
tools. The following statement appears on the front page of the website for the p5.js programming 
platform.
We are a community of, and in solidarity with, people from every gender identity and expression, sexual 
orientation, race, ethnicity, language, neuro-type, size, disability, class, religion, culture, subculture, political 
opinion, age, skill level, occupation, and background. We acknowledge that not everyone has the time, PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT IN EDUCATION
 427
financial means, or capacity to actively participate, but we recognize and encourage involvement of all kinds. 
We facilitate and foster access and empowerment. We are all learners. (p5.js, n.d. para.)
Compare this philosophy with the mandate for erasure from the Assemblage-as-Narrative. The 
central administration proclaims: This exciting new program will focus on students identified with 
special educational needs and students who speak languages other than English or forms of English 
that are less preferred by our valued local employers.
In contrast to the closed source prescriptive tools imposed on teachers to universalize , there are 
multiple public initiatives underway to create more inclusive, accessible, culturally situated tools 
that use GenAI. One example of the open-source commitment to community, access, and inclusion 
comes from the Wekinator website titled, Posthuman Feminist AI: Bits and Bytes, Creating with 
Unheard Voices in AI Design . This ongoing project uses Fiebrink’s tools to collaborate for protest 
and for purposes of civic engagement (Fiebrink n.d.). All are welcome to join the collaboration 
regardless of computer program or other technology expertise. The group focuses on AI design with 
attention to embodiment as well as cultural and emotional needs (Fiebrink n.d.).
Another initiative, called FLAIR (First Languages AI Reality) is an Indigenous-focused group 
(Mila n.d.). A sister project of FLAIR is the Lakota AI Code Camp, a summer camp for Lakota youth 
to learn Python, data science, machine learning, and app development (Coffey 2024 ). AI Code 
Camp’s ethos draws on ethic of the social good and local cultures (Goldweber 2015 ). During the 
camp, students create apps based on their own local interests in what they would like to preserve, 
such as flora and fauna. Under these circumstances, it is crucial to explain to the local community 
and to young people how GenAI works and what the implications are for local knowledges, once 
these are positioned in the technologised spaces. Such community-based projects have more 
potential for doing-with teachers and students than current proposals to do-to them. Even so, 
caution should always be taken with any initiative claiming to preserve culture, especially if that 
initiative intends to gather up culture and sell it.
According to Blain et al. (2024 ) humans need to learn to interact with machines; while the 
machine has a goal, it is mindless. The programmer controls the goal. Teachers and students need 
the ability to design not just the lesson or choose the technology – they need to be able to design it 
themselves as programmers. This is more than prompting GenAI. This is about real control of how 
advanced technologies are designed and implemented. Within a frame of community-engaged 
praxis, central administrations need to support teachers and students in learning to make with self- 
directed technologies, and/or to be free to not use these technologies at all.
Discussion
In reading-through the Assemblage-as-Narrative enabled many entangled opportunities to (re) 
consider hierarchies, (re)consider the (non)human, and (re)configure for solidarity.
(Re)considering hierarchies
Diffractive knowings generated from the Assemblage-as-Narrative challenged the hierarchies of 
human and (non)human. First, language functioned as a material consideration for forms of life 
(Wittgenstein et al. 2009 ). This included aspects of controlling the form and content of professional 
learning as well as guiding student and teacher perceptions. The use of language to materially 
constitute bodies took shape as a lack of dialogue (Freire 2006 ). GenAI was more worthy of trust in 
its capacity to use and produce language than children or teachers (Freire 2008 ). Such findings have 
also emerged in previous research studies where teacher judgement and emotion are considered 
harmful to the project of demanding teachers use GenAI (e.g. Nazaretsky et al. 2022 , Velander et al.  
2024 ). The concept of GenAI as the most competent agent should give pause (Harari 2024 ).428
 M. RICE ET AL.
Instead of an imaginative orientation to GenAI (Illich 1975 ), GenAI in scenarious such as in our 
Assemblage-as-Narrative provide the machinery of technology for teachers to do things to students, 
particularly students who have been historically traumatised and treated poorly in schools. The 
technological agent was also supposed to do to teachers through eliminating their decision-making 
capacity while telling them the story that it is easing their workload. While GenAI represented an 
assemblage of human knowledge, teachers and students could not fully participate because they 
lacked access to coding knowledge and resources (Fiebrink n.d.). Moreover, there were no mean -
ingful structures for doing conviviality with GenAI within local knowledge and community norms 
(Illich 1975 , Goldweber 2015 ). A perceived need to remediate students with stringent tutorial 
practices to please local employers should not be confused as a local concern; this is 
a hierarchical proposition based on a racial social contract and universalist goals (Brayboy 2005 ; 
Mills 1997 ). Findings from this diffractive reading suggests that if GenAI is used at all, it should be 
done with teachers and students, rather than done to—all the way from the coding down to the 
pedagogy. Researchers can study what happens when teachers have more technical knowledge and 
can engage more fully in collaborations with students and community members beyond doing the 
bidding of conglomerates of local employers. There also might be great learning that comes from 
involving more members of local communities in land/water issues with respect to when, how, and 
to what extent environmental degradation is a manageable risk for some educational benefit (Rice 
and Argüello de Jesús, 2024 ).
(Re)considering the (Non)human
Entangled with the notion of challenging hierarchical ways of knowing and doing and being are 
questions about what is human. It is also important to consider how teachers, students, and school 
leaders can respond to questions of Being together. GenAI programs and applications are often 
positioned as tools ; yet tools are made from people’s work, and they are never without context and 
history (Illich 1975 ). Thus, who and what is a tool and what is a machine and what is an agent can 
shift (Harari, 2024 ). Are GenAI truly being used as tools in the Assemblage-as-Narrative? Or are 
teachers being used as tools since they are supposed to do the bidding of the market to use the 
GenAI to ensure the on-going demand? A teachers-as-tools framing adheres closely to the tenets of 
the racial social contract where universal goods for universal progress have been touted (Mills 1997 ).
Another possibility is that the learners are being used as tools. Schoolchildren must become as 
tools to ensure that using GenAI seems normal, universal. This framing aligns with colonization 
discourses as well; GenAI is designed to take more jobs than it creates, cost more money than it 
saves, waste more time than it preserves, and consume more energy than it generates (Powell 2024 ). 
Instead of a divide existing between children who do/do not have access to AI or who do/do not 
learn to use AI well, there will be more complicated fractures and fissures around how children are 
able to take on their own agencies as writers and thinkers, how children survive the devaluing of 
their efforts to make and do, how children survive in communities where environmental effects 
from GenAI are visible and crushing, and how children move back and forth best between worlds 
AI creates for them and ones they create for themselves. Findings from this diffractive reading 
suggest that teachers’ professional learning about GenAI cannot occur outside of learning about 
historical trauma and survival of the exploited. Telling teachers how GenAI works does not mean 
telling teachers GenAI is smarter or more objective than them (Nazaretsky et al. 2022 , Velander 
et al. 2024 ). It does not even mean helping teachers understand more about the linguistic algo-
rithmic underpinnings, although that is part of what needs to happen. Instead, it means giving 
teachers information about the environmental traumas and realities of students with learning 
differences when teachers use advanced technologies, including GenAI (Rice and Argüello de 
Jesús 2024 ). Research studies might focus on how teacher thinking and decision making emerges 
when teachers have this critical information for instructional planning where the teachers are agents 
not tools of GenAI or the companies that profit from GenAI’s use and distribution.PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT IN EDUCATION
 429
(Re)Configuring for solidarity
Mills (1997 ) described how the social contract was written to inscribe White-ness and then 
presumed neutral. Recognizing power configurations is insufficient. Diffraction opens spaces to 
do something outside of naming power. In this work, diffractive readings revealed the need to 
approach professional learning with the understanding that universal good for universal progress is 
a myth, and so is the need to place deficit labels on students and teachers to maintain the myth 
(Brayboy 2005 , Jackson 2020 ). What animates the promulgation of the myth of the miracle of 
GenAI is the need to use it to fix students who sit in the most precarious places on the educational 
landscape. Destabilizing this myth is necessary to build coalitions for communities that serve 
everyone better (Mohanty 2003 ).
What the findings from this diffractive activity suggest is that diffraction itself may be part of the 
pedagogies for professional learning that will present pathways for rejecting universalism. Some 
teachers or teacher educators may think they would never do what is presented in our Assemblage- 
as-Narrative scenario. That is fine. They can write their own scenario and subject it to diffraction. 
They can gather a group of colleagues and use multiple theories without the intent to compare the 
theories – but to gain insight. They can see what they learn about what they are asking of teachers. 
Such work would also present interesting opportunities for further research into how teacher 
educators learn what they do, does to teachers and in turn, does to children.
Conclusion
In this paper, we used critical posthumanisms to diffractively explore an Assemblage-as-Narrative 
where teachers were required to learn to use GenAI for tutoring against multilingual children and 
learning with learning differences. We used reading-through to learn how to challenge hierarchical 
thinking and (re)consider who and what materialised as tools. We also demonstrated the need to 
acknowledge historical trauma and current realities of oppression and inequity in teaching teachers 
to use GenAI. Moving forward, professional learning for teachers might take diffractive perspec -
tives in considering how to read-through to upend universalism for GenAI in practice.
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).
ORCID
Mary Rice 
 http://orcid.org/0000-0002-8138-512X
References
Arnesen, K., et al. 2019 . Experiences with personalized learning in a blended teaching course for preservice teachers. 
Journal of online learning research , 5 (3), 275–310. Available from: https://www.learntechlib.org/p/210637/ .
Arvin, M., Tuck, E., and Morrill, A., 2013 . Decolonizing feminism: challenging connections between settler coloni -
alism and heteropatriarchy. Feminist formations , 25 (1), 8–34. doi:10.1353/ff.2013.0006  .
Baidoo-Anu, D. and Ansah, L., 2023 . Education in the era of generative artificial intelligence (AI): understanding the 
potential benefits of ChatGPT in promoting teaching and learning. Journal of AI, 7 (1), 52–62. doi:10.61969/jai. 
1337500  .
Barad, K., 1996 . Meeting the universe halfway: realism and social constructivism withoutcontradiction. In: L. Nelson 
and J. Nelson, eds. Feminism, science, and the philosophy of science. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer, 161–194.
Barad, K., 2007 . Meeting the universe halfway: quantum physics and the entanglement of matter and meaning . 
Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Barr, M., 1987 . Feminist fabulation; or, playing with patriarchy vs. The masculinization ofmetafiction. Women’s 
studies: An interdisciplinary journal , 14 (2), 187–191. doi:10.1080/00497878.1987.9978697  .430
 M. RICE ET AL.
Benjamin, R., 2019 . Race after technology . Cambridge, UK: Polity.
Blain, L., 2024 . GPT-4 is 82% more persuasive than humans, and AIs can now read emotions . Newatlas Technology. 
https://newatlas.com/technology/gpt-persuasion-manipulation .
Bonilla-Silva, E., 2021 . Racism without racists: color-blind racism and the persistence of racial inequality in America . 
Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Boninger, F., Molnar, G., and Saldana, C., 2019 . Personalized learning and digital privatization of curriculum and 
teaching. National education policy center . Available from: https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED595239 .
Bower, M., et al. 2024 . How should we change teaching and assessment in response to increasingly powerful 
generative artificial intelligence? Outcomes of the ChatGPT teacher survey. Education and information technol -
ogies , 1–37. doi:10.1007/s10639-023-12405-0  .
Braidotti, R., 2002 . The politics of ontological difference. In: T. Brennan, ed. Between feminism and psychoanalysis 
(pp. 89-105). London: Routledge.
Braidotti, R., 2019 . A theoretical framework for the critical posthumanities. Theory, culture & society , 36 (6), 31–61. 
doi:10.1177/0263276418771486  .
Brassington, L., Traylor, A., and Rice, M., 2024 . Using the task of supporting struggling writers to consider broader 
issues of composition with generative AI in English language arts education. In: C. Moran, Revolutionizing 
English education: the power of AI in the classroom. eds. Lanham, Maryland: Lexington Books, pp. 125–139.
Brayboy, B., 2005 . Toward a tribal critical race theory in education. The urban review , 37 (5), 425–446. doi:10.1007/ 
s11256-005-0018-y  .
Broussard, M., 2019 . Artificial unintelligence: how computers misunderstand the world . The Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press.
Bullough, R., Jr and Pinnegar, S., 2001 . Guidelines for quality in autobiographical forms of self-study research. 
Educational researcher , 30 (3), 13–21. Available from: http://doi.org/10.3102/0013189X030003013  .
Caine, V., et al., 2017 . Exploring the purposes of fictionalization in narrative inquiry. Qualitative inquiry, 23 (3), 215– 
221. doi:10.1177/1077800416643997  .
Cajete, G., 2000 . Native science: natural laws of interdependence . Santa Fe, NM: Clear Light Publishers.
Calderón, D., et al. 2012 . A chicana feminist epistemology revisited: cultivating ideas a generation later. Harvard 
educational review , 82 (4), 513–539. doi:10.17763/haer.82.4.l518621577461p68  .
Carr, L., 1997 . “Colorblind” racism . London: Sage.
Chambers, D., 2019 . Is freire incoherent? Reconciling directiveness and dialogue in Freirean pedagogy. Journal of 
philosophy of education , 53 (1), pp. 21–47. Available from: 10.111/1467-9752.12340  .
Clandinin, D.J., 1989 . Developing rhythm in teaching: the narrative study of a beginning Teacher’s personal practical 
knowledge of classrooms. Curriculum inquiry , 19 (2), 121–141. doi:10.1080/03626784.1989.11075320  .
Clandinin, D.J. and Connelly, F.M., 1986 . Rhythms in teaching: the narrative study of teachers’ personal practical 
knowledge of classrooms. Teaching & teacher education , 2 (4), 377–387. doi:10.1016/0742-051X(86)90030-2  .
Coffey, D., 2024 . Indigenous youth are using coding and AI to save native language. Teen . Available from: https:// 
www.teenvogue.com/story/these-coding-camps-are-teaching-indigenous-youth-to-save-native-language-through 
-ai. [Accessed 24 Jan 2024].
Crawford, K., 2022 . Atlas of ai. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Creed, B., 1993 . The monstrous-feminine: film, feminism, psychoanalysis . London: Routledge.
Davies, B. and Harré, R., 1990 . Positioning: the discursive production of selves. Journal for the theory of social 
behaviour , 20 (1), 43–63. doi:10.1111/j.1468-5914.1990.tb00174.x  .
DiMaggio, P. and Powell, W., 1983 . The iron cage revisited: institutional isomorphism and collective rationality in 
organizational fields. American sociological review , 48 (2), 147–160. doi:10.2307/2095101  .
Evans, W., Gable, R., and Habib, A., 2021 . Lessons from the past and challenges for the future: inclusive education for 
students with unique needs. Education sciences , 11 (6), 281. Available from: https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
educsci11060281  .
Fiebrink, R., n.d. Wekinator . Available from: http://wekinator.org .
Forbes, J., 2008 . Columbus and other cannibals: the Wetiko disease of exploitation, imperialism, and terrorism . New 
York, NY: Seven Stories.
Fox, L., 2014 . Effects of technology on literacy skills and motivation to read and write . MA thesis. State University at 
Brockport. Available from: https://hdl.handle.net/20.500.12648/5734 .
Fox, N. and Allred, P., 2017 . Sociology and the new materialism . Los Angeles, CA: Sage.
Freire, P., 2006 . Pedagogy of the oppressed . London: Continuum.
Freire, P., 2008 . Education for critical consciousness . London: Continuum.
Freire, P., 2021a . Pedagogy in process: the letters to Guinea-Bissau . London: Continuum.
Freire, P., 2021b . Pedagogy of hope: reliving pedagogy of the oppressed . London: Continuum.
Gadotti, M. and Torres, C., 2009 . Paulo Freire: education for development. Development and change , 40 (6), 
1255–1267. Available from: http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-7660.2009.01606.x  .
Goldweber, M., 2015 . Computer science education for social good. ACM SIGCAS computers and society , 45 (2), 
29–30. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1145/2809957.2809963  .PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT IN EDUCATION
 431
Gonzalez-Barahona, J., 2021 . A brief history of free, open source software and its communities. Computer , 54 (2), 
75–79. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1109/MC.2020.3041887  
Haaland, D. and Newland, B., 2022 . Interior secretary Haaland remarks on abuse of native American children. 
Available from: https://www.c-span.org/video/?520148-1/interior-secretary-haaland-remarks-abuse-native- 
american-children&live= .
Harari, Y. N. Nexus: A brief history of information networks from the Stone Age to AI (New York: Random House) 
2024
Haraway, D., 1992 . Otherworldly conversations; terran topics; local terms. Science as culture , 3 (1), 64–98. Available 
from: http://doi.org/10.1080/09505439209526336  .
Haraway, D., 2019 . It matters what stories tell stories; it matters whose stories tell stories. A/B: Auto/Biography 
studies , 34 (3), 565–575. Available from: http://doi.org/10.1080/08989575.2019.1664163  .
Hodges, C. and Kirschner, P., 2024 . Innovation of instructional design and assessment in the age of generative 
artificial intelligence. Technology trends , 68 (1), 195–199. Available from: https://link.springer.com/article/10. 
1007/s11528-023-00926-x .
Illich, I., 1975 . Tools for conviviality . New York: Fontana.
Jackson, Z., 2020 . Becoming human: matter and meaning in an anti-black world . New York: New York University 
Press.
Jandrić, P., 2021 . Postdigital gathering. In: C. Achieng-Evensen, K. Stockbridge, and S. SooHoo, eds. Freirean echoes: 
scholars and practitioners dialogue on critical ideas in education. 1st ed. Gorham ME: Myers Education Press, 91– 
100.
Kaplan-Rakowski, R., et al. 2023 . Generative AI and teachers’ perspectives on its implementation in education. 
Journal of interactive learning research , 34 (2), 313–338. Available from: https://www.learntechlib.org/p/222363/ .
Knox, J., 2013 . The limitations of access alone: moving towards open processes in educationtechnology. Open praxis , 
5 (1), 21–29. doi:10.5944/openpraxis.5.1.36  .
Kristeva, J., 1980 . Desire in language: a semiotic approach to literature and art. New York: Columbia University Press.
Lee, E., 2021 . Education for the symbiosis of humans and machines in a posthuman age. suffering and evil in nature: 
comparative responses from ecstatic naturalism . Lanham, ME: Rowman and Littlefield.
Lim, A. and Nicolaides, A., 2024 . Becoming-with-ai: rethinking professional knowledge through generative knowing. 
Reflective practice , 25 (3), 391–405. doi:10.1080/14623943.2024.2321227  .
Lu, J., et al. 2024 . Supporting teachers’ professional development with generative AI: the effects on higher order 
thinking and self-efficacy. IEEE transactions on learning technologies , 17, 1279–1289. Available from: https:// 
ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/10444988 .
Merten, K., 2021 . Diffractive reading: new materialism theory and critique . Lanham, ME: Rowman & Littlefield.
Mila, n.d. FLAIR initiative . Available from: https://mila.quebec/en/project/flair-initiative/ .
Mills, C.W., 1997 . The racial contract . Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Mishler, E., 1990 . Validation in inquiry-guided research: the role of exemplars in narrativestudies. Harvard educa -
tional review , 60 (4), 415–443. doi:10.17763/haer.60.4.n4405243p6635752  .
Mohanty, C., 2003 . Feminism without borders: decolonizing theory, practicing solidarity . Durham, NC: Duke 
University Press.
Morris, M., 2020 . AI and accessibility. Communications of the Acm , 63 (6), 35–37. doi:10.1145/3356727  .
Mulcahy, D., 2011 . Assembling the ‘accomplished’ teacher: the performativity and politics of professional teaching 
standards. Educational philosophy and theory , 43 (sup1), 94–113. doi:10.1111/j.1469-5812.2009.00617.x  .
Nazaretsky, T., et al. 2022 . Teachers’ trust in AI -powered educational technology and a professional development 
program to improve it. British journal of educational technology , 53 (4), 914–931. doi:10.1111/bjet.13232  .
Powell, A., 2024 . AI is expensive . Available from: https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/medialse/2024/06/05/ai-is-expensive/ .
Ricaurte, P., Gómez-Cruz, E., and Siles, I., 2024 . Algorithmic governmentality in Latin America: sociotechnical 
imaginaries, neocolonial soft power, and authoritarianism. Big data & society , 11 (1), 20539517241229697. 
Available from: http://doi.org/10.1177/20539517241229697  .
Rice, M. and Argüello de Jesús, J.T., 2024 . Decolonizing digital accessibility within land/water realities using minimal 
computing. Learning, media and technology , 1–14. doi:10.1080/17439884.2024.2394471  .
Rillig, M., et al. 2023 . Risks and benefits of large language models for the environment. Environmental science & 
technology , 57 (9), 3464–3466. doi:10.1021/acs.est.3c01106  .
Smith, A. 2012 . Indigeneity, settler colonialism, and white supremacy . D. HoSang, O. LaBennett, and L. Pulido, eds. 
Racial formation in the 21st century. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 66–90.
Strom, K., Mills, T., and Abrams, L., 2021 . Illuminating a continuum of complex perspectives in teacher development. 
Professional development in education , 47 (2–3), 199–208.
Tsing, A., et al. 2017 . Arts of living on a damaged planet . Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
United Nations System, Chief Executives Board for Coordination, 2022 . Summary of deliberations . Addendum . 
principles of the ethical use of artificial intelligence in the united nations system . Available from: https://unsceb. 
org/topics/artificial-intelligence .432
 M. RICE ET AL.
van Langenhove, L., 2017 . Varieties of moral orders and the dual structure of society: a perspective from positioning 
theory. Frontiers in sociology , 2. doi:10.3389/fsoc.2017.00009  .
Velander, J., et al. 2024 . Artificial intelligence in K-12 education: eliciting and reflecting on Swedish teachers’ 
understanding of AI and its implications for teaching & learning. Education and information technologies , 
29 (4), 4085–4105. Available from: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10639-023-11990-4 .
Wall Kimmerer, R., 2013 . Braiding sweetgrass: indigenous wisdom, scientific knowledge, and the teachings of plants . 
Minneappolis, MN: Zest books.
The White House, 2023 . Fact sheet. President Biden issues executive order on safe, secure, and trustworthy artificial 
intelligence. Available from: https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2023/10/30/fact- 
sheet-president-biden-issues-executive-order-on-safe-secure-and-trustworthy-artificial-intelligence/ . [Accessed 
30 Oct 2023].
Wittgenstein, L. 2009 . Philosophical investigations . (P. Hacker and J. Schulte, eds.). West Sussex, UK: Wiley- 
Blackwell.
Ziarek, E., 2022 . Against digital worldlessness: Arendt, narrative, and the onto-politics of big data/ai technologies. 
Postmodern culture , 32 (2). Available from: http://doi.org/10.1353/pmc.2022.0002 .PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT IN EDUCATION
 433
